1
Recipes fR om youR Dietitian’s Kitchen
Anti-inflAmmA tory 
Ea ting
By Chloe McLeod, Monica Kubizniak and Kate Bennett forOvEr  
50 rEcipE s 
to manage 
inflammationanti-inflammatory Eating2
First published in 2016 by
The Bone and Joint Clinic Pty Ltd trading as BJC Health
Text copyright © The Bone and Joint Clinic Pty Ltd trading as BJC Health 2016
Photographs copyright © Martyna Angell 2016
Styling & Photography by Martyna Angell
Book Design by Lisa ValuyskayaRecipes created and tested by Chloe McLeod, Monica Kubizniak and Kate BennettForeword written by Chloe McLeodForeword edited by Monica Kubizniak, Kate Bennett, Sarah McIntyre, Jarrod Glascott, Irwin Lim, Roberto 
Russo, Herman Lau and Errol Lim
National Library of Australia
Cataloguing-in-Publication data:
Authored by McLeod, Chloe; Kubizniak, Monica; Bennett, KateAnti-inflammatory eating: Recipes from your dietitian’s kitchen
ISBN: 978-0-9945270-0-4
We would like to acknowledge our family and friends who have helped us along the way to making this 
cookbook a reality.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted by any person or entity (including 
Google, Amazon or similar organisations), in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, scanning or by any information storage and retrieval system, without prior permission in writing from the publisher.
The authors and the publisher have made every effort to contact copyright holders for material used in this 
book.  Any person or organization that may have been overlooked should contact the publisher.3
Recipes fR om youR Dietitian’s Kitchen
Anti-inflAmmA tory 
Eating
By Chloe McLeod, Monica Kubizniak and Kate Bennett foranti-inflammatory Eating4
table of contents
Who we are & why we want to share these recipes 5
Introduction 7
What do we mean by ‘Anti-Inflammatory’? 7
Who is this cookbook for? 8
Specific points for some individuals with arthritis and/or autoimmune conditions 9
Do I have to stick to this way of eating all the time? 11
Order of the book – why did we set it up this way? 11
Foods and strategies to focus on 12
What we have left out, and why 17
What about dairy and gluten? Don’t these cause inflammation? 19
Does it matter if I eat these foods sometimes? 19
Should I be using supplements? 20
Practice mindful eating 20
Thank you! 21
Anti-Inflammatory Pantry List 22
Recipes
Vegetables and fruit 24
Nuts and seeds 44
Herbs and spices 68
Legumes and grains 92
Fish 112
References 1325
With more than 30 years combined experience, we have found healthy, easy-to-prepare 
recipes to be one of the most successful strategies for helping our clients to achieve their best health. Countless research papers show the value of eating a plant-based, 
anti-inflammatory diet – both for managing inflammatory health conditions such as 
osteoarthritis, rheumatoid arthritis, obesity and diabetes, and for helping avoid lifestyle-related problems. 
At BJC Health, we are passionate about providing the best care for people with arthritis. 
For this reason, we have put together a selection of our favourite recipes – new, old, and 
inspired by others – to help you live your healthiest life.Who we are & why we want 
to share these recipes
Chloe McLeod - Accredited Practicing Dietitian, Accredited 
Nutritionist and Accredited Sports Dietitian  B. Nut. & Diet., MPH
Due to suffering a number of food intolerances, I understand first 
hand just how important it is to fuel your body with the right foods.  
I am so excited about this book as I feel that there is nothing more 
satisfying than helping others improve their health by including beautiful fresh, whole food choices into their diet.
Monica Kubizniak – Accredited Practicing Dietitian, 
Accredited Nutritionist BSpSc (ExSc), BSc (Nutr), M.Dietetics
I love being a dietitian.  For the past 15 years, I have helped people 
to manage numerous health conditions by incorporating anti-inflammatory eating.  I hear from clients that the most important role 
I can play is to provide advice that is realistic and works with their 
lifestyles.  As a busy mum of three young children, I am excited that this collection of recipes not only provides fantastic nutrition, but they are also delicious and easy to make.  
Wishing you happy cooking and best of health!
Kate Bennett - Accredited Practicing Dietitian, Accredited 
Dietitian, Provisional Sports Dietitian  M. Nut & Diet, B. Ex Phys
One of the things I love most about anti-inflammatory eating – and 
what most of my clients comment on – is that the focus is on foods to 
include more of, not what to exclude. There are endless possibilities 
of delicious, nutritious whole foods to combine and choose from. I share these recipes with my family and loved ones and can’t wait to share them with you too.anti-inflammatory Eating6
“Let food be thy medicine,  
and medicine be thy food.”
Hippocrates
© The Bone & Joint Clinic Pty Limited trading as BJC Health 20167
As Hippocrates said, ‘Let food be thy medicine, and medicine be thy food’. Now, more than 
any other time in history, research is indicating that he was, and still is, correct. Certain foods can assist with reducing inflammation, whilst many others may in fact promote it.
As dietitians who specialise in working with people that suffer with inflammatory 
conditions, in particular inflammatory joint conditions and obesity, the most requested resource by far we get asked for are recipes. So, we thought it was time we put together a collection of quick, easy and most importantly, tasty meal and snack ideas that aim to 
reduce the inflammation burden within the body.
Inflammation can occur in the body due to many reasons. There seems to be an ever 
increasing number of factors within our day to day environment can result in inflammation 
being triggered throughout the body, for example exposure to cigarette smoke, pollution, or sleeping poorly on a regular basis.  In addition, stress also plays a significant role in the development of generalised inflammation.   Alternatively, you can have inflammation that is localised to a specific part of the body due to an injury or illness. Some medical 
conditions also result in inflammation, both throughout the body, or in localised areas.Introduction
What do we mean  
by ‘Anti-Inflammatory’?
Research indicates that eating certain foods may help with reducing 
the risk of developing these different types of inflammation and 
reduce the severity of inflammation present when it occurs with 
various diseases/conditions. This approach to food is often referred to as an anti-inflammatory diet.
anti-inflammatory Eating8
One of the reasons we are so excited about this book is everyone can benefit from 
including these recipes as a regular part of their diet.
If you are interested in following a mostly plant-based, wholefood diet aiming for long-
term good health, and/or you suffer from one of the many forms of arthritis, including osteoarthritis, Rheumatoid arthritis, Systemic Lupus Erythematosis, Psoriatic arthritis, and Gout, as well as any other health issue that may result in or from inflammation, such as diabetes, heart disease and obesity, these recipes will help you become the healthiest 
YOU possible.
Research also shows that an anti-inflammatory diet can also benefit those who are highly 
physically active people, including athletes, resulting in better functioning body systems and less muscle soreness post-exercise.Who is this cookbook for?
All our recipes are based on wholefoods that are fresh and seasonal. 
To make your life as easy as possible, we have also chosen foods 
which you can easily buy at your local farmers market, green grocer or 
supermarket; we have avoided including random ingredients that you will probably only ever use once or twice!
9
For many people, but particularly for those with arthritis, inflammatory joint and/or 
autoimmune conditions, there is often very conflicting evidence about which dietary 
strategies work best for you. This client group is one we spend a significant amount of time working with, and one of the primary reasons for the creation of this book. Below is a quick summary of the evidence for the role that nutrition can play in managing five of the most common conditions we specialise in treating.
   Rheumatoid Arthritis  
At present, following a wholefoods, plant-based diet, including plenty of fish, whilst avoiding soft drinks and processed foods as much as possible, is the first step to managing rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Inclusion of a fish oil supplement is also recommended, with 
a total combined dose of EPA and DHA (the relevant Omega-3-Fatty Acids) of 2.7g per 
day. In addition an adequate vitamin D level is also important. Weight loss (if required) has also been shown to potentially provide significant positive benefits across various clinical parameters. 
If we feel there could be further symptom improvement, some of the other strategies that 
can be trialled include vegetarian or vegan diets, gluten and/or dairy free diets, as well as a particular approach to fasting.  There is not currently enough quality research for these 
to be our go-to recommendations, however it will be interesting to see where the research 
moves in the coming years. Research indicates that use of curcumin, a compound found in 
turmeric, reduces the effect of TNF- alpha which is a central mediator 
of joint inflammation that characterises the disease.   The dose 
required to optimise this effect is yet to be determined and the degree of clinical benefit has yet to be established.Specific points  
for some individuals 
with arthritis and/or 
autoimmune conditionsanti-inflammatory Eating10
   Psoriatic Arthritis
Nutritional strategies recommended for psoriatic arthritis (PsA) are very similar to those 
for RA. However, a particular focus in this population is the goal of achieving or maintaining a healthy weight range as obesity is a common problem in this condition, resulting in an 
increased risk of cardiovascular disease.  As a consequence, weight management is a key 
factor in the management of PsA.
   Gout
Most people are aware that diet has a direct effect on the manifestation of gout.  Achieving or maintaining a healthy weight is one of the best ways of managing gout. Cherries also play a particularly important role in reducing the risk of gout attacks; consumption of cherries 
themselves may result in a 35% reduction in risk of a gout attack on their own. When 
used with allopurinol (a gout medication), this was reduced by 75%! Purines are another compound to be aware of, and to be careful of overindulging in, as these can increase the risk of an attack. This includes (but isn’t limited to) prawns and other shellfish, sardines, meat and vegemite. Legumes also contain purines, so people with gout need to be careful 
of over consuming these. However, a low calorie diet has been shown to be more effective 
than a low purine diet; including legumes, nuts and seafood is still important. Low fat dairy, vitamin C, avoidance of alcohol and inclusion of plenty of vegetables are other effective strategies for managing gout.
   Fibromyalgia
Key strategies for managing Fibromyalgia include managing your weight, including plenty of plant foods, especially vegetables, and ensuring adequate vitamin D and iron levels. Some people experience non-coeliac gluten sensitivity, so may need to be careful of gluten 
consumption. Reduction or avoidance of dairy is reported to help improve symptoms by 
some, particularly those with irritable bowel syndrome as well. Removing, or avoiding excitotoxins from your diet is recommended. This includes artificial sweeteners, such as aspartame, and mono-sodium glutamate.
   Osteoarthritis
Research indicates that loss of just 5% of body weight can impact pain felt in joints affected by osteoarthritis (OA). Loss of 10% of body weight can improve this even further. Research also shows that following a whole food, plant based, Mediterranean style diet can result 
in improved physical function. There is also some evidence that sesamol, a compound 
found in sesame seeds may help slow cartilage degeneration, whilst a compound found in broccoli (and other cruciferous vegetables) called sulforaphane may also protect against cartilage destruction.11
Whilst we do recommend that you include healthy meals as the key part of your daily food 
intake, we also understand that you are human, and not eating healthily 100% of the time is not only OK, it is normal. All we encourage is that you do the best that you can.
Over the course of seeing thousands of clients, we have found we get better results when 
the focus is on foods that people need to eat more of rather than telling them not to 
eat something. For this reason, we have chosen to split the book up into five sections: 
Vegetables & Fruit, Grains & Legumes, Fish & Seafood, Nuts & Seeds, and Herbs & Spices. Current evidence-based research indicates that many of these foods and spices provide key anti-inflammatory compounds. Apart from reducing inflammation, the whole body and its systems function better, and there is the benefit of prevention of elevated cholesterol, 
blood pressure and blood sugar levels. The result is better health, and for you to feel great! Order of the book – why 
did we set it up this way?Do I have to stick to this 
way of eating all the time?anti-inflammatory Eating12
We don’t want to give you recipes without also providing you the context or the reason for 
using the foods we have. This section will focus on the key foods and strategies to help you reduce inflammation, improve your health and gain a better quality of life.
   Vegetables and Fruit
At present, only 8% of the Australian population eats enough vegetables on a daily basis. That means that the chance you AREN’T eating enough vegetables is 92%, or that less than 1 in 10 people is eating enough! One of the best things about actually achieving your 
daily vegetable intake is how much food you get to eat!  As with sources of plant protein, 
vegetables and fruits contain antioxidants, polyphenols and phytoestrogens. We like to think about it as a kaleidoscope of colours; the more colour on your plate, the bigger the variety of nutrients you are consuming. We often find our clients are so surprised about the volume of food they can eat when following an anti-inflammatory diet that contains 
an adequate amount of vegetables each day. There is no way you will go hungry and that is 
important to us! We like to recommend consuming at least five serves of vegetables each day, or better yet, aiming for at least 50% of your meals to be made up of vegetables.
Including 2-3 serves of fruit each day is also recommended, as fruit is a good source of 
fibre, along with providing other important phytochemicals. Plus, it is naturally sweet! One 
serve of fruit is a medium-sized piece of fruit, or 2 small-sized fruits (e.g. apricot), or 1 cup 
of chopped fruit, or 10 grape-sized pieces.
Whilst some key nutrients have shown to assist with reducing inflammation, research 
indicates that our bodies function better when we eat whole foods, rather than focusing on specific nutrients (such as through use of vitamin supplements). This is due to the fact 
that we don’t yet know all there is to know about how these phytochemicals work together 
in a whole food, so isolating them is not necessarily the best way forward.  
   Herbs and spices
Similar to vegetables, herbs and spices contain significant quantities of phytochemicals. In particular, curcumin, a substance found in turmeric, cumin and ginger has a significant beneficial anti-inflammatory effect, specifically when consumed with pepper. Herbs such 
as parsley, rosemary and basil are especially nutrient-dense, resulting in positive anti-
inflammatory effects from consumption of relatively small amounts. Including herbs and spices in fresh or dried form is a great way of enhancing the flavour of your meals, and increasing the nutrient density of your meal.
Note that if you choose to include dried herbs, these have a shelf life; if you notice that 
they are not providing flavour as you would expect, it is likely they are ready to be used 
as compost.Foods and strategies  
to focus on13
   Fibre
Fibre is an often underrated part of a healthy diet. The current recommendations suggest 
aiming for 30g per day, however numerous studies have indicated that consuming significantly more than this may have several health benefits.
There are two key different types of fibre; soluble and insoluble.
Soluble fibre includes pectins, gums and mucilage, which are found mainly in plant cells. 
One of its major roles is to lower blood cholesterol levels. It works by absorbing water, to create a viscous fluid, or gel-like substance,  which helps to push everything smoothly through your system, whilst also slowing digestion. Good sources of soluble fibre include fruits, vegetables, oat bran, barley, seed husks, flaxseed, psyllium, dried beans, lentils, peas, soy milk and soy products. Soluble fibre can also help with constipation.
Insoluble fibre includes cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin, which make up the structural 
parts of plant cell walls. A major role of insoluble fibre is to add bulk to faeces and prevent 
constipation and associated problems such as haemorrhoids. Good sources include wheat bran, rice bran, the skins of fruits and vegetables, nuts, seeds, dried beans and wholegrain foods.
Both soluble and insoluble fibre are beneficial to the body and most 
plant foods contain a mixture of both types. 
Resistant starch is not traditionally thought of as fibre, though it acts in a similar way. 
Resistant starch is a part of starchy food (approximately 10 per cent) that resists normal digestion. It is found in many unprocessed cereals and grains, firm bananas, potatoes and 
lentils, and is added to bread and breakfast cereals. It can also be formed by cooking and 
manufacturing processes such as snap freezing, or cooking and cooling food. 
Resistant starch is also important in bowel health. Bacteria in the large bowel ferment 
and change the resistant starch into short-chain fatty acids, which are important to bowel health and may protect against cancer. These fatty acids are also absorbed into the 
bloodstream and may play a role in lowering blood cholesterol levels.
The principle advantage of a diet high in fibre is the health of the digestive system. The 
digestive system is lined with muscles that massage food along the tract from the moment 
a mouthful is swallowed until the eventual waste is passed out of the bowel (a process called peristalsis). 
It is even more important to drink more water than usual with a high fibre diet; not enough 
water can result in firm stools, and blockages. Also, it is not recommended to suddenly 
increase your fibre intake; increase slowly to avoid frequent bathroom trips!anti-inflammatory Eating14
   Plant protein
Using more plant protein rather than animal protein is a key focus in anti-inflammatory 
eating. Research (and anecdotal stories from our clients) show that plant based protein has an anti-inflammatory effect on the human body, while too much animal protein can have a 
pro-inflammatory effect. Research indicates that large quantities, particularly of processed 
and red meat are linked to bowel cancer. Choosing sources of protein such as legumes, lentils, nuts, seeds, tofu and other whole soy foods creates less inflammation in the body than animal protein when digested, and can also work to help reduce inflammation that has already manifested. These foods contain a combination of antioxidants, polyphenols and 
phytoestrogens, which are fantastic for reducing inflammation. 
Choosing plant-based protein more often is also better for the environment, as it results 
in more sustainable eating practices in the long term; meaning a healthier you, and a healthier planet. Animals leave a much larger carbon footprint, particularly those that are grain fed rather than pasture fed, which contributes to production of carbon dioxide 
into the atmosphere. Soil health is also improved with plant crops, rather than animal 
grazing. To put things into perspective, it requires 22,000 L of water to produce 1kg of beef, compared to 3,000 L of water to produce 1kg of rice.
15
Nuts and seeds are full of healthy fats, such as mono-unsaturated fats and Omega 3 fatty 
acids. Nuts also have a low Glycemic Index (GI), aiding satiety levels, which can help keep weight at a desirable level. In particular, linseeds (flaxseeds) are rich in a type of 
phytoestrogen called lignans. One serve of nuts equals 30g, ¼ cup, or a small handful. Aim 
to include these daily.
Avocado is also a great source of mono-unsaturated fats, and other fat-soluble vitamins, 
such as A, E and K.
Deep sea fish such as salmon, tuna, mackerel and sardines, are a great source of omega 
3. They also provide a good source of protein, with fish being recommended more so than any other land-based animal in an anti-inflammatory diet. It is important to mention that 
choosing sustainably-caught fish is encouraged as much as possible, to ensure the health 
of our oceans for generations to come.
The Mediterranean Diet indicates that inclusion of olive oil as a key source of healthy fats 
can assist with management and avoidance of a number of health conditions, such as metabolic syndrome and diabetes.A high fat diet with low levels of Omega 3 fatty acids may result 
in activation of the immune system, insulin resistance, and liver 
problems, all of which can be prevented when the diet contains 
adequate Omega 3 fatty acids.   Healthy fats
Promotion of low fat diets is a thing of the past. However, we do recommend including 
healthy fats as the majority of fat intake, rather than any fat. Aiming to include adequate amounts of poly- and mono-unsaturated fats, and in particular, aiming to have the correct 
ratio of Omega 3 to Omega 6 is of utmost importance. It is recommended to aim for 
Omega 3 and 6 to make up at least 5% of total energy intake in order to maintain normal cell function and support growth. Ideally, the omega 6 to 3 ratio to aim for is 4:1, which is relatively easy to achieve once processed foods are reduced in the diet. Some diets have been shown to contain as high as 87% omega 6, mainly due to consumption of highly processed foods that contain vegetable oils, such as store-bought cakes, biscuits, bars 
and pies.anti-inflammatory Eating16
   Healthy weight
Research shows that achieving even a 5% loss in body weight can reduce the load on your 
joints. A 10% weight loss yields significant results, and as such, great pain relief in people with osteoarthritis. 
Carrying excess weight has been shown to promote production of inflammatory cytokines, 
which increases levels of inflammatory biomarkers. This is particularly so when extra 
weight is carried around the abdominal area. For this reason, aiming to achieve a healthy 
weight, and reducing abdominal obesity where present, is encouraged.
   Gut Health
The important role of the gut in influencing disease and in maintaining health is increasingly supported by research. Bacteria, called probiotics, or microflora, are involved in many metabolic activities, including assisting with nutrient absorption and immune function. 
Composition of these microflora can change in a matter of hours in critically ill patients, 
and it has also been shown that those who are overweight, or with autoimmune conditions (such as rheumatoid arthritis) or diabetes have different microflora composition to those without these conditions. Furthermore, probiotics may play a role in management of inflammatory bowel disease and some types of cancer.
Prebiotics are the food for the healthy bacteria in our gut. These play a crucial role in 
determining our gut microflora. Common prebiotic foods include legumes, onion, garlic, asparagus and watermelon. Consuming a diet rich in prebiotics, fibre and vegetables, along with inclusion of fermented foods, such as yoghurt, sauerkraut and kimchi may assist with improving gut health. 17
   Minimal meat
While we haven’t avoided including meat entirely, reduction in consumption of meat can 
have positive effects on both your health and the environment. If you choose to include meat, it is recommended to choose the best quality you can afford, with a focus on grass 
or pasture fed options. Recommendations on the volume of consumption vary. The World 
Cancer Research Fund recommends less than 500g of cooked red meat per week, whilst the Mediterranean Diet suggests no more than 340-450g per month. 
   Sugar
Sugar is found in a wide variety of foods, from fresh fruit to jelly lollies. Whole foods that contain sugar, prior to any processing, are healthy options that we recommend to include regularly (such as fresh fruit). It is recommended to limit processed foods or foods not in 
their natural state that contain refined sugars, such as fruit juice.What we have left out, 
and whyanti-inflammatory Eating18
   Processed foods
We think little time needs to be spent on this; most of us know that regular consumption 
of highly processed foods, particularly those high in saturated fats, sugar and salt are not healthy and are less likely to improve your health.
   Artificial preservatives and sweeteners
The majority of the included recipes are made from scratch, and include little, if any artificial preservatives or sweeteners. There is an abundance of research indicating that artificial sweeteners are likely to result in higher body fat, and both artificial preservatives 
and sweeteners may have adverse effects on management of some health conditions. If 
you choose to include these, do your best to keep them to a minimum.
   Alcohol
Whilst some research indicates that small amounts of alcohol, particularly red wine can help with management of some medical conditions, alcohol itself is pro-inflammatory. Alcohol can exacerbate symptoms of some medical conditions, such as gout, or negatively interact 
with medications (for example methotrexate). Over indulgence can make it more difficult to 
lose weight. Alcohol also increases strain on the liver, where it is processed.
If you choose to drink alcohol, stick to the recommendation of 1 standard drink per day for 
women, or 2 for men, with at least 2 alcohol free days per week.
19
As you will see from the recipes found in this book, many of the choices we recommend 
are naturally gluten and/or dairy-free. Gluten-free and dairy-free alternatives are also often included due to the prevalence of people following this type of diet. 
Why didn’t we just cut it out? Because cutting whole food groups out of your diet is often 
not required. There is recent research that dairy can actually be anti-inflammatory for people carrying extra weight, or who have Type 2 Diabetes, Metabolic Syndrome and Gout. In relation to gluten, research indicates that gluten is only inflammatory for people with 
coeliac disease. 
Unless you are actually allergic to the foods we have left out, it does not matter if you include 
them sometimes. In fact, we usually recommend you DO include these sometimes; cutting 
foods entirely can result in feelings of deprivation, which may then lead to unhealthy food behaviours, such as binging. The rule of thumb we like to go by is to include these things as often as you wish, as long as you are also able to achieve your health goals, or maintain a healthy body.  If you are not achieving these things, then it is likely you will benefit from 
reducing your consumption of these foods.What about dairy  
and gluten? Don’t these 
cause inflammation?
Does it matter if I eat 
these foods sometimes?Some people, particularly those with inflammatory arthritis, do report 
feeling much better when they reduce their intake of gluten and dairy. 
However, further research is required into the role that dairy and 
gluten play in the inflammatory response.
It is recommended that you see a dietitian who specialises in food intolerance before 
cutting whole food groups from your diet.
anti-inflammatory Eating20
For the most part, we recommend you choose to include whole foods as much as 
possible. Not everyone requires supplements, however some supplements we do often recommend include:Should I be using 
supplements?
Practice mindful eating* Fish oil
* Probiotics* Vitamin D
* CoQ10* Magnesium
* Green lipped mussel
Taking a multivitamin is not necessary in most instances, unless you are unable to achieve adequate nutrition through your daily food intake, for example if you have an eating disorder, or are following an elimination diet.
Please remember that this is a very individual thing, and it is worthwhile speaking with your 
GP or dietitian about what is best for you.  More is not better when it comes to supplements.
With much of the population leading busy, fast-paced lives, eating often becomes 
something to get through as quickly as possible. Starting to practice mindfulness in how you eat your food can have fantastic effects not only on your health, but also on how much enjoyment and satisfaction you get from the food you are eating. 
How do I eat mindfully? Start by taking your time with your meal, pausing between each 
mouthful and really paying attention to each and every bite. Think about how it feels in 
your mouth, the flavours, the textures and the sounds. The more you practice this, the 
better you will get, and the more you will find that you are satisfied from eating much less.21
Thank you!
We truly hope you enjoy this book, and that it provides you with inspiration to cook some 
great tasting, wonderfully healthy recipes to help you live a healthy life.
We’d love to see your recipes on social media, so please follow our Facebook page and tag 
your photos with #bjccooks
Chloe, Monica and Kate
anti-inflammatory Eating22
Anti-Inflammatory  
Pantry List
To help make the healthy choice easy, we suggest you keep the following foods in your pantry.
It’s unlikely that you will need to have everything all at once, instead just choose from each 
food group.  
 Grains 
 Legumes
 Nuts and seeds ̦Amaranth
 ̦Barley*
 ̦Basmati rice
 ̦Brown rice
 ̦Buckwheat ̦Bulgur*
 ̦Freekeh*
 ̦Millet
 ̦Quinoa
 ̦Rolled oats* ̦Rye*
 ̦Steel cut oats*
 ̦Wild rice
*Contain gluten
 ̦Adzuki beans
 ̦Black eyed beans
 ̦Borlotti beans
 ̦Butter beans
 ̦Cannellini beans ̦Chickpeas
 ̦Fava beans
 ̦Haricot beans
 ̦Kidney beans ̦ Lentils (any colour/type)
 ̦Mung beans
 ̦Soy beans
 ̦4 bean mix
 ̦Almonds
 ̦Brazil nuts
 ̦Cashews
 ̦Hazelnuts ̦Macadamias
 ̦Peanuts
 ̦Pecans ̦Pine nuts
 ̦Pistachios
 ̦Walnuts 23
 Oils Choose cold pressed Herbs and Spices 
 Condiments/spreads
 Canned SeafoodMost spices are a great addition to an anti-inflammatory diet. Below are some of 
our favourites:
 ̦Basil
 ̦Black pepper
 ̦Cayenne pepper
 ̦Cinnamon
 ̦Coriander  ̦Coriander seed
 ̦Cumin
 ̦Cumin seed
 ̦Garlic
 ̦Ginger ̦Oregano
 ̦Parsley
 ̦Rosemary
 ̦Turmeric
 ̦Manuka honey
 ̦Maple syrup ̦Natural nut butter
 ̦Tahini ̦Wholegrain mustard
 ̦Coconut oil
 ̦Extra virgin olive oil
 ̦Macadamia oil ̦Olive oil 
 ̦Rice bran oil ̦Sesame oil
 ̦Peanut oil
Yes, fresh is best, but we know it isn’t always convenient, or possible. Try and choose sustainably caught brands, with minimal salt. Choose options that are canned in either spring water or 100% olive oil as often as possible:
 ̦Mackerel
 ̦Oysters ̦Salmon (pink or red)
 ̦Sardines ̦Tunaanti-inflammatory Eating24
fruitANDVegetables25
savoy slaw
with Mustard Dressing
  Serves 2           5-10 Minutes Preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
Salad:
•	¼ savoy cabbage, shredded
•	2 sticks celery, chopped finely
•	 1 large handful snow peas, chopped finely
Dressing:
•	1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
•	1 tsp mustard
Method:
1. Combine salad ingredients in a bowl.
2.  To make dressing combine olive oil and mustard in a 
small bowl, and stir until combined.
3.  When about to serve, drizzle dressing over salad, then 
toss to coat.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  473 kJ
Protein:  1.8 g
Fat:  10.3 g
Fibre:  2.1 g
wheat freevegan vegetarian gluten free
dairy freeanti-inflammatory Eating26
Cabbage s alad 
2 Ways
  Serves 1           30 Minutes Preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	½ cup red cabbage, shredded
•	10 snow peas, chopped
•	1 carrot, chopped
•	1 celery stalk, chopped
•	10 green beans, ends trimmed and chopped
Method:
1. Combine all ingredients in a bowl.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  354 kJ
Protein:  4.2 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  9.5 g(for basic salad)
Mediterranean style:
Middle Eastern style:
(swap snow peas 
for red capsicum or cucumber)ServIng Sugge StIonS:wheat free
pescatarian
vegan vegetarian
fodmapgluten free dairy free
Use this salad as a base to add other ingredients
Mediterranean style:
Add baby spinach leaves, beetroot, salmon and chickpeas 
or lentils. Then add extra virgin olive oil for a dressing.
Middle Eastern style:
Add chickpeas, parsley and tomato. Add Tahini with lemon juice, turmeric, cumin and paprika as the dressing.27
pomegranate 
salad
  Serves 2           30 Minutes Preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	Seeds from ½ pomegranate
•	1 carrot, grated
•	10 cm piece of cucumber, sliced
•	1 large handful baby spinach leaves
•	2/3 cup red cabbage, shredded
•	Extra virgin olive oil to taste
Method:
1.  Remove seeds from pomegranate either with a wooden 
spoon or immerse in water.
2.  Combine all ingredients in a salad bowl. 
3.  Drizzle with extra virgin olive oil if desired and serve.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  627 kJ
Protein:  4.2 g
Fat:  5.1 g
Fibre:  10.7 g
wheat free
vegan vegetariangluten free dairy free
This is a beautiful side to ocean trout or salmon.
Note: if you would like to view different techniques to remove seeds from the pomegranate you can 
search Google or YouTube. To remove seeds with a wooden spoon view here , and to remove seeds 
by water immersion view here .ServIng Sugge StIonS:anti-inflammatory Eating28
roCket, beetroot 
and w alnut salad 
  Serves 2           10 minutes preparation time, 20 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 beetroots, skin removed, cut into 8ths
•	Extra virgin olive oil to drizzle
•	 Mixed herbs (your choice of fresh or dried herbs e.g. 
parsley, basil, oregano)
•	½ bag rocket leaves (roughly 200 g)
•	8 walnuts, broken into pieces
•	100 g chevre/Danish feta
Method:
1.  Pre-heat oven to 180°C. 
2.  Place beetroot in a greased baking tray, drizzle with 
olive oil and sprinkle with mixed herbs. Bake for 15-20 
minutes or until cooked.
3.  Place rocket leaves into salad bowl. Roughly chop 
walnuts and add to rocket, then crumb chevre or feta over the leaves.
4.  Once cooked beetroot has cooled slightly add it to the 
salad bowl and mix all ingredients together.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1242 kJ
Protein:  15.2 g
Fat:  21.9 g
Fibre:  4.7 g
wheat free
veganvegetarian gluten free
dairy free(leave out cheese)
(leave out chevre)
(reduce amount 
of beetroot to no more than 2 slices per person)fodmap
Note: delicious as a side to a main meal, or add chicken to make into a tasty main meal. We 
recommend wearing gloves to avoid beetroot stains on your hands whilst handling beetroot.29
Chargrilled 
vegetables
  Serves 2-3           15 minutes preparation time, 5-10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 zucchini, cut into chunks
•	1 red capsicum, cut into chunks
•	6 mushrooms, halved (choose your favourite kind)
•	1 tomato, halved
•	1 bunch asparagus spears, bottoms trimmed
•	Extra virgin olive oil (to drizzle)
•	Cracked pepper
•	Herbs and spices of your choice
Method:
1.  Drizzle vegetables with a little extra virgin olive oil and 
sprinkle with cracked pepper, along with any other 
herbs you wish to flavour with.
2.  Heat grill portion of BBQ or griddle pan.
3.  Add vegetables to grill, flipping as needed. Cook for 3-5 
minutes or until cooked through.
Note: this works especially well when having a BBQ.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  458 kJ
Protein:  6.8 g
Fat:  4.1 g
Fibre:  5.8 g
wheat freevegan vegetarian
gluten freedairy free
(swap mushrooms 
and asparagus for your choice of low FODMAP vegetables)fodmapanti-inflammatory Eating30
savoury muffins
  Makes 12           20 minutes preparation time, 20-30 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	Extra virgin or cold pressed olive oil spray
•	2 cups of mushrooms, cut into small pieces
•	1 capsicum cut into small cubes
•	2 large carrots, grated
•	1 large zucchini, grated
•	2 spring onion, sliced into thin pieces
•	1 cup gluten free self raising flour
•	¼ cup parmesan cheese, finely grated
•	1 tbsp mixed herbs
•	4 eggs (3 of them separated)
•	2 tomatoes, sliced into thin circles
Method:1.  Preheat oven to 180°C and line a 12 serve muffin dish with muffin patties or 
baking paper.
2.  Heat a small fry pan over moderate heat and spray with olive oil. Add chopped 
mushrooms and sauté well. Add capsicum if you would like to soften it slightly.
3.  Combine all the vegetables, flour, cheese, and herbs in a large mixing bowl.
4.  Add one whole egg and 3 egg yolks to the vegetable mixture and combine. 
5.  Place egg whites in a separate mixing bowl and whisk with a hand held mixer until 
soft peaks form.
6.  Fold the egg whites into the rest of the mixture. Do not over combine, as the air from 
the egg whites help to keep the muffins fluffy.
7.  Spoon mixture into the muffin patties and place a slice of tomato over each muffin. Bake 
for 20-25 minutes or until golden on top and a skewer placed into the middle of a muffin 
comes out clean. Once cooked remove from heat and leave to cool for 5 minutes. 
Note: store in the fridge in an airtight container for up to 1 week.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  418 kJ
Protein:  5.7 g
Fat:  2.6 g
Fibre:  3 g
wheat free vegetarian gluten free
dairy free
(swap mushrooms 
for spinach leaves, use only green part of spring onions)fodmap31
Savoury Muffins (p. 30)anti-inflammatory Eating32
ChiCken and 
vegetable soup
  Serves 8           20-30 minutes preparation time, 60 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
•	1 leek, halved, thinly sliced
•	1 brown onion, finely chopped
•	2 cloves garlic, crushed
•	2 large carrots, finely chopped (peeling optional)
•	2-3 celery sticks, finely chopped
•	2 small zucchini, diced
•	1 swede or turnip peeled, diced
•	 1 ¼ cups dry soup mix (combination of lentils, barley, 
split peas etc.)
•	2.5 L chicken stock (salt reduced)
•	1 kg skinless chicken (thighs and legs work best)
•	PepperPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1453 kJ
Protein:  32.4 g
Fat:  10 g
Fibre:  7.7 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
(leave out onion and 
garlic, use garlic infused olive oil, and green part of leek only. Use FODMAP friendly stock)fodmap
Method:
1.  Heat the oil in a large saucepan over medium heat. Add leek, onion and garlic and 
stir until soft. Add carrots, celery, zucchini and swede stirring occasionally for two 
minutes or until soft. Stir in soup mix, stock, chicken and 1 cup water. Bring to boil.
2.  Reduce heat to low and simmer, partially covered for 1 hour (stirring occasionally) 
until soup mix and vegetables are tender.
3.  Remove chicken legs from soup and allow to cool slightly. Remove meat from the 
bones, roughly chop and add the chicken meat back to the soup. Season with pepper and serve.33
Chicken and  
Vegetable Soup
(p. 32)anti-inflammatory Eating34
Mushroom Tomato and Basil Pizza on 
Cauliflower b ase
  Serves 4           15 minutes preparation time, 60 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 1 large cauliflower, trimmed and cut into florets 
(approximately 650 g usable cauliflower)
•	150 g sweet potato, peeled and cut into small cubes
•	2 eggs, lightly beaten
•	1 tbsp gluten free plain flour
•	1 tbsp mixed Italian herbs
•	 250 g sliced mushrooms – e.g. shitake, portobello, button
•	1 whole tomato, sliced
•	Parmesan cheese, to sprinkle on pizza
•	Fresh basil, approximately 10-12 leavesPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  509 kJ
Protein:  8.3 g
Fat:  3.5 g
Fibre:  5.5 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
Method:
1.   Pre-heat oven to 220°C.
2.  Place half the cauliflower in a food processor on high for 1 minute or until cauliflower 
has broken down to a fine grain. Place in a heatproof bowl. Repeat the process with the remainder of the cauliflower.
3.  Cover cauliflower and microwave on high for 6 minutes to cook through. Set aside and 
cool completely (to speed up this process spread cauliflower over a plate or tray).
4.  Place sweet potato in a heatproof bowl with a dash of water. Cover and microwave on high 
for 3 minutes or until you are able to make a smooth mash. Mash sweet potato and set 
aside to cook.
5.  Once cauliflower and sweet potato have cooled, place in a large mixing bowl with eggs, 
herbs and gluten free flour. Stir until all mixture is combined completely. 
6.  Line a large baking tray with oven-proof paper or olive oil spray to grease. Spread 
cauliflower mixture evenly over tray (approximately 1 cm thick). Bake for 20-25 minutes or until slightly golden and top forms a crust.
7.  Once cooked remove cauliflower base from oven. Set aside to cool. vegetarian35
8.  Once moderately cooled, flip pizza base so you will place the toppings on the reverse side. 
Spread your desired amount of tomato, mushrooms, and Parmesan cheese over pizza base. Return to oven for 10 minutes.
9.  Remove from oven, cool for 2 minutes before slicing and serving. Place basil leaves on top 
of pizza to serve.
Mushroom Tomato  
and Basil Pizza  
on Cauliflower Base (p. 34)anti-inflammatory Eating36
green and red 
smoothie
  Serves 2           15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 small handful celery leaves
•	10 cm piece continental cucumber
•	¾ cup seedless grapes (red or green, or mixture)
•	4 large strawberries
•	4 mint leaves
•	Water and ice cubes as desired
Method:
1.  Wash celery leaves, cucumber, grapes and strawberries, 
roughly chop, and add to a high-powered blender along 
with the mint leaves and 3-4 ice cubes. Blend on a high 
speed. Add water to achieve desired consistency and blend until smooth.
2.  Serve cold in two tall glasses.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  285 kJ
Protein:  1.5 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  4.3 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free fodmap
37
Smoothies (p. 36-39)anti-inflammatory Eating38
orange smoothie
  Serves 2           10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 fresh beetroot, peeled and cut into cubes
•	 1 orange, cut into small pieces (discard rind if your 
blender is not powerful enough to pulverise it)
•	1 carrot, roughly chopped
•	1 cm nub ginger, peeled, and finely grated 
•	1 tsp turmeric
•	Water as desired
Method:
1.   Add all ingredients together in your blender and mix on 
high speed. Add water as needed to achieve your desired 
consistency.
2.  Serve in two tall glasses.
Note: wear gloves to avoid beetroot stains on your hands whilst 
handling beetroot.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  300 kJ
Protein:  2 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  5.2 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
fodmap (reduce amount 
of beetroot to no more than 2 slices per person)39
green smoothie
  Serves 1           10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 cup baby spinach leaves
•	5 cm piece cucumber
•	1 stick celery
•	2-3 mint leaves
•	½ cm nub ginger, peeled
•	1 lemon, peeled
•	Water or ice cubes as needed
Method:1.  Combine all ingredients in blender or juicer.
2.  Serve in a tall glass.
Note: this recipe is one you will find in most juice bars. We like it 
if you make it yourself, and leave all the fibrous parts in the juice to help you to stay much more satisfied. Feel free to swap the lemon for a small apple, a pear or ¾ cup of berries.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  383 kJ
Protein:  4.8 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  9.8 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
fodmap(when lemon or 
low FODMAP fruit is used)anti-inflammatory Eating40
Chia, mango and 
Celery smoothie
  Serves 2           10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 celery stalk, leaves included
•	2 mango cheeks, skin discarded
•	2 tsp chia seeds
•	½ cm nub of ginger, grated
•	4 mint leaves
•	Water and ice cubes as desired
Method:
1.  Wash celery sticks, roughly chop and add to a powerful 
blender. Add mango, chia seeds, ginger, mint leaves and 
4-6 ice cubes to the blender and blend until smooth. 
Add water or additional ice cubes until you achieve your desired consistency.
2.  Serve in tall glasses.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  213 kJ
Protein:  1.2 g
Fat:  1.2 g
Fibre:  2.4 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
fodmap(swap mango for 
your choice of low FODMAP fruit, such as orange or pineapple)41
Chia, Mango  
and Celery Smoothie
(p. 40)anti-inflammatory Eating42
Strawberry, Papaya and Carrot 
frozen iCe-bloCks
  Makes 6           15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1/3 papaya, deseeded and chopped
•	4 large strawberries
•	½ large carrot, chopped
•	1-2 tbsp low fat natural or Greek yoghurt 
•	1/3 cup water
Method:
1.  Blend all ingredients in a food processor until smooth.
2.  Add to ice block moulds and place in freezer.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  67 kJ
Protein:  <1 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  1.1 g
wheat free vegetarian gluten free
dairy free
fodmap(if using lactose 
free or diary alternative yoghurt)(if using dairy 
alternative yoghurt)43
Strawberry,  
Papaya and Carrot 
Frozen Ice-Blocks
(p. 42)anti-inflammatory Eating44
seedsANDNuts45
Fruit-Free muesli 
  Serves 10           20 Minutes Preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	½ cup walnuts, chopped
•	½ cup brazil nuts, chopped
•	½ cup macadamias, chopped
•	½ cup cashews, chopped
•	½ cup almonds, chopped
•	¼ cup sunflower seeds
•	¼ cup pepitas
•	1 tbsp chia seeds
•	1 tbsp sesame seeds
•	1 cup rolled oats
•	½ cup puffed millet
•	½ cup buckwheat
•	½ cup rolled barley
•	½ cup rolled spelt
•	2 tsp cinnamon
•	2 tsp dried ginger
Method:
1. Combine all ingredients and store in an airtight container.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1565 kJ
Protein:  11.5 g
Fat:  27 g
Fibre:  6.7 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten freedairy free
With fresh, seasonal fruit and your choice of milk or yoghurt (dairy or other suitable 
alternatives).ServIng Sugge StIonS:(swap oats, spelt and 
barley for larger serves of other grains, or include puffed rice and quinoa flakes instead)
(swap to gluten free 
grains, as above, and swap cashews for pecans)
fodmapanti-inflammatory Eating46
Green Granola
  Serves 4           15 minutes preparation time, 60 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 cup rolled oats
•	¼ cup raw almonds, chopped
•	¼ cup raw cashews, chopped
•	¼ cup pepitas
•	¼ cup sunflower seeds
•	Sprinkle of cinnamon (to taste)
•	1 tbsp honey, golden syrup or maple syrup
•	1 tbsp macadamia oil
•	½-1 tsp Matcha Powder* 
Method:1.  Pre-heat oven to 120°C.
2.  Combine all dry ingredients in a bowl.
3.  Spread onto a baking paper lined tray. 
4.  Gently drizzle honey/syrup and oil over dry mixture. 
5.  Bake in oven for approximately 1 hour, mixing 
occasionally.
6.  Allow to cool on baking tray.
Note:  store in an air-tight container.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1275 kJ
Protein:  9.1 g
Fat:  20.4 g
Fibre:  4.2 g
(swap oats for 
buckwheat, cashews for walnuts and honey for maple syrup)(swap oats for 
buckwheat)wheat free vegan vegetarian
fodmapgluten freedairy free
* Matcha is a green powder made of ground green tea leaves, which is particularly rich 
in antioxidants. It’s available in some supermarkets and health food stores. To give this recipe a twist, add ½-1 tsp Matcha powder to the dry mixture and stir through before 
adding wet ingredients. You do not have to include it, but is fun for something different.47
Green Granola (p. 46)anti-inflammatory Eating48
mixed nut and seed 
Butter 
  1 Serve - approximately 10 g            10 minutes preparation time, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	¾ cup macadamia nuts
•	¾ cup cashew nuts
•	2 tbsp sunflower seeds
•	2 tbsp pepitas
•	1 tbsp flaxseeds
•	1 tsp chia seeds
•	3 tbsp macadamia oil
•	2 tsp ground turmeric
•	1 tsp ground ginger
•	¼ tsp salt
Method:
1.  Pre heat oven to 150°C.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  281 kJ
Protein:  1 g
Fat:  6.5 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free
veganvegetarian gluten free
dairy free
(swap cashews 
for other low FODMAP nuts)fodmap
2.  Lay nuts and seeds on a baking tray and bake for approximately 10 minutes until crunchy.
3.  Place toasted nuts and seeds in a small food processor and blend for 15 seconds. 
Add two tablespoons of the macadamia oil as well as turmeric, ginger and salt. Blend 
again, this time for longer until ingredients are well combined.
4.  Scape the sides of the food processor and assess the consistency. Add more oil as 
required and blend further until a smooth paste is formed.
Note: store in a glass jar, in the fridge, sealed tightly. Will keep in the fridge for up to 2 weeks.49
Mixed Nut and Seed Butter (p. 48)anti-inflammatory Eating50
Ginger Turmeric and Almond 
nut Butter
  1 Serve - approximately 10 g           10 minutes preparation time, 20 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 2 cups of raw nuts of your choice (we used almonds, 
however macadamias, cashews, peanuts and hazelnuts also work particularly well. Sunflower, pepita, sesame and chia seeds are also great additions)
•	2 tsp turmeric
•	1 tsp ginger
•	½ tsp salt
•	3-4 tbsp macadamia nut oil
Method:
1.  Pre heat oven to 140°C.
2.  Line a baking tray with baking paper and lay nuts in 
single layer on the tray. 
3.  Roast nuts for 12 minutes, or until nice and crunchy.
4.  Add nuts, turmeric, ginger and salt to food processor 
and blend on high speed (depending on speed of 
processor). Stop, scrape the sides, then restart. Add 
macadamia nut oil gradually. Repeat this process until the nut butter is smooth and a little runny. 
Note:  store in a glass jar, in the fridge, sealed tightly. Will keep in 
the fridge for up to 2 weeks.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  271 kJ
Protein:  1.6 g
Fat:  6.1 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
(use low FODMAP 
nuts, such as macadamias or peanuts)fodmap51
Ginger Turmeric  
and Almond Nut Butter
(p. 50)anti-inflammatory Eating52
Banana pancakes
  Serves 1 as a meal - Serves 2 as a snack 
  10 minutes preparation time, 5 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 ripe banana, mashed
•	2 eggs, lightly beaten
•	1 tbsp LSA
•	1 tbsp almond meal
•	¼ tsp ground cinnamon
•	½ tsp chia seeds
•	Canola oil / rice bran oil cooking spray (if required)
Method:1.  Combine mashed banana and eggs in a bowl and mix 
well with a fork.
2.  Add LSA, almond meal, ground cinnamon and chia 
seeds to the banana/egg mixture and combine well.
3.  Heat a large non-stick fry pan, or use canola oil cooking 
spray sparingly to lightly grease pan.
4.  Spoon large portions of the mixture into the pan. Cook 
for 1-2 minutes on each side or until golden brown.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1721 kJ
Protein:  21.2 g
Fat:  25 g
Fibre:  9.3 g
wheat free gluten free
(swap almond meal for 
buckwheat flour)fodmapvegetarian
dairy free
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Eat pancakes plain on the go, or serve with your choice of natural yoghurt, fresh fruit, 
honey and/or coconut.53
Banana  
Pancakes (p. 52)anti-inflammatory Eating54
Banana  
and nut slice
  Makes 24 small pieces or 12 large slices
          15-20 minutes preparation time, 20-25 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 banana, mashed
•	1 egg
•	1 tbsp honey 
•	 ½ cup walnuts, blended in food processor to a 
grainy consistency
•	 ½ cup almonds, blended in food processor to a 
grainy consistency
•	¼ cup pepitas
•	¼ cup sunflower seeds
•	¼ cup dried apricots, cut into small pieces
•	¼ cup dried dates, cut into small pieces
•	 ¼ cup hazelnut meal (almond meal can be 
substituted here)
•	½ cup shredded coconut
•	1 tbsp chia seeds
•	1 tsp ground cinnamonPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  182 kJ
Protein:  1.3 g
Fat:  2.5 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian
Method:
1.  Pre heat oven to 180°C
2.  Combine banana, egg and honey in a bowl and mix well.
3.  Combine all of the dry ingredients in a bowl, then stir in banana and egg mix till they 
all bind together.
4.  Bake for 20-25 minutes or until golden on top. Cool on a drying rack and cut into slices. 
Note: slice keeps for up to 5 days, but may also be frozen and kept for up to 3 months.
This slice can also be made with the Fruit Free Muesli recipe (page 45).(use low FODMAP nuts, 
and swap honey for maple syrup)fodmap55
Banana  
and Nut Slice (p. 54)anti-inflammatory Eating56
manGo muFFins
  Makes 10-12           20 minutes preparation time, 20-30 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 ripe mangoes, or 2 cups frozen mango
•	1 handful frozen berries
•	½ - 1 cup almond meal
•	½ - 1 cup gluten free self-raising flour
•	2 eggs
•	1 tbsp chia seeds
•	Almond or soy milk as needed for moisture
Method:1.   Preheat oven to 180°C and lightly grease a muffin tray 
or line with muffin patties.
2.  Blend mango, then combine with frozen berries, 
almond meal, gluten free self-raising flour, eggs and 
chia seeds.
3.  Add a splash of milk as required to moisten batter and 
spoon batter into muffin tray.
4.  Bake in oven for approximately 20-30 minutes, or until 
a skewer gently poked into muffin can be removed clean of batter.
Note: this recipe also works well with seeds, dates and other 
nuts or fruit added in as well or instead.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  591 kJ
Protein:  4.7 g
Fat:  6.2 g
Fibre:  2.8 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
(use egg replacer,  
or extra chia seeds)vegan57
Mango
Muffins (p. 56)anti-inflammatory Eating58
papaya, spinach 
and Almond Smoothie
  Serves 1           5-10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	Big handful of baby spinach leaves
•	¼ avocado
•	1 cup papaya
•	10 almonds
•	3/4 cup almond milk (store bought or home made)
Method:
1.  Add all ingredients to blender, and blend until smooth.
2.  Serve in a tall glass.
Note: feel free to substitute papaya for other tropical fruits of your 
choice, such as paw paw, guava, or pineapple. You can also use a combination of your favourites.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1454 kJ
Protein:  8.2 g
Fat:  21 g
Fibre:  12.8 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian
(use an alternative milk 
and use a maximum of 10 almonds or, swap to FODMAP friendly nut such as macadamia)fodmapvegan59
Basic BlueBerry
Smoothie
  Serves 1           5 minutes preparation and assembly time
vegetarian fodmap veganIngredients:
•	½ punnet blueberries
•	5 almonds
•	Ice cubes
•	½ cup water
Method:1.  Place all ingredients into a blender, and blend  
until smooth.
2.  Pour into a small glass to serve.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  285 kJ
Protein:  1.6 g
Fat:  3.4 g
Fibre:  1.5 g
wheat free gluten free dairy freeanti-inflammatory Eating60
hazelnut  and 
Banana smoothie
  Serves 1           5-10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	200 mL milk (soy, unsweetened almond or cow’s)
•	1 banana, peeled and broken in half
•	3 tsp hazelnut meal, or 10 g hazelnuts
•	¼ tsp cinnamon
Method:1.  Add all ingredients to blender and combine until smooth.
2.  Serve in a tall glass.
Note:  feel free to substitute hazelnuts for almonds or your other 
favourite nut. You can also freeze the banana before blending, 
which will thicken the smoothie and give an ice cream like texture.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  894 kJ
Protein:  3.8 g
Fat:  10.7 g
Fibre:  4 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy freevegetarian
(use low a FODMAP 
type of milk and nuts. If using hazelnuts, use a maximum of 10)(avoid cow’s milk)
fodmapvegan61
Papaya, Spinach and Almond Smoothie (p. 58)
Basic Blueberry Smoothie (p. 59)
Hazelnut and Banana Smoothie (p. 60)anti-inflammatory Eating62
raw nut & d ate Balls
 with Chia Seeds
  Makes approximately 12 balls           15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	¾ cup pitted fresh medjool dates
•	1 tbsp raisins
•	1 tbsp goji berries
•	2 tbsp pepitas
•	8 brazil nuts
•	¾ cup raw almonds
•	Dash water
•	Chia seeds (for rolling)
Method:1.  Add dates, raisins, goji berries, pepitas, brazil nuts and almonds to blender and blend, 
adding a little water as necessary. Mixture should create a smooth paste.
2.  Tip chia seeds onto a dinner plate.
3.  Roll mixture into balls, then roll each ball in the chia seeds until it is covered.
4.  Store in the fridge. (They will keep for up to a week).Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  484 kJ
Protein:  3.1 g
Fat:  7.2 g
Fibre:  2.5 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian vegan63
Raw Nut & Date Balls
 with Chia Seeds 
(p. 62)anti-inflammatory Eating64
Delicious Nutty 
chocolate slice
  Makes 18 pieces           20 minutes preparation time, 20-30 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 1 cup dried dates, chopped into pieces
•	1/3 cup walnuts
•	1/3 cup almonds
•	1/3 cup pistachios
•	1/3 cup almond meal
•	1/3 cup cocoa powder
•	 ½ cup gluten free self-raising flour
•	 ¼ cup shredded coconut
•	 ¼ cup desiccated coconut
•	1 cup water
•	1 eggPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  485 kJ
Protein:  2.8 g
Fat:  6.8 g
Fibre:  2.4 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy freevegetarian
Method:
1.   Pre heat oven to 180°C and line a loaf 
tin/baking dish with baking paper.
2.  Place chopped date pieces into a small 
bowl and cover with boiling water. 
Allow to stand for 5 minutes for dates to soften.
3.  Place walnuts, almonds and pistachios 
into a small food processor and blend 
until crushed to a grainy consistency.
4.  Combine nut mix, almond meal, cocoa, 
flour and coconut into a medium 
mixing bowl and stir until combined.
5.  Transfer soaked dates into a small 
saucepan and place over moderate-low heat. Allow the dates to soften further 
and become a purée consistency.  Bit by bit add the additional cup 
of water and allow to reduce until 
approximately 1 cup of total volume 
remains. Allow puree to cool slightly. If mixture is still lumpy, blend with a hand held stick mixer so lumps are removed.
6.  Add egg to date puree and beat well.
7.  Add the date and egg mix to dry 
ingredients and stir until combined. 
Pour mixture into loaf dish, spread 
evenly and place in the oven for 20-25 minutes.
8.  Once cooked, place on drying rack for 
5 minutes. Serve immediately warm or 
will keep in airtight container for up to 4 days.65
Delicious Nutty 
Chocolate Slice (p. 64)anti-inflammatory Eating66
Pumpkin and Cashew 
curry
  Serves 4-6           15-20 minutes preparation time, 30-45 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 Drizzle of extra virgin olive or coconut oil
•	1 ½ tsp cumin, ground
•	1 tsp turmeric
•	½ tsp coriander seeds
•	 ½ Kent/Jap pumpkin, chopped into bite size pieces, 
skin removed
•	 ¼ cauliflower, chopped into bite size pieces
•	200 mL water
•	 1 can light coconut milk (400 mL)
•	 2 cm piece of ginger, peeled and grated
•	 2 tbsp loosely packed coriander, finely chopped
•	 1 tbsp loosely packed basil, finely chopped
•	1 cup cashews
•	Salt to tastePer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1098 kJ
Protein:  6.4 g
Fat:  21.2 g
Fibre:  3.4 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian vegan
Method:
1.  Heat oil in large saucepan, and add cumin, turmeric and coriander seeds.
2.  Once spices are aromatic, add chopped pumpkin and cauliflower and stir until coated 
with spices.
3.  Add water, coconut milk and ginger and stir through.
4.  Add ¾ of the basil and coriander, and simmer on medium/low heat for approximately 
25 minutes.
5.  Add cashews, and simmer for another 5 minutes, or longer if necessary. If required, 
add a pinch of salt.
6.  Serve on its own, or with brown rice or quinoa, and a sprinkle of coriander and basil on top.
Note : if desired, roast cashews before adding them for more crunch!67
Pumpkin 
and Cashew Curry 
(p. 66)anti-inflammatory Eating68
spicesANDHerbs69
Anti-Inflammatory
shots
  Serves 1           15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	 ¼ cup fresh pineapple, skin removed and chopped 
into small pieces
•	1 cm nub fresh turmeric, peeled
•	¼ tsp cracked pepper
•	Water as needed
Method:
1.  Add all ingredients to blender, and pulse until all 
ingredients form a liquid.
2.  Pour into a small glass to serve.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  117-147 kJ
Protein:  <1 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  1.8-2.2 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free fodmapPineapple shot
Ingredients:
•	½ fresh lemon, with peel removed
•	1 cm nub fresh turmeric, peeled
•	½ cm nub fresh ginger, peeled
•	¼ tsp cracked pepper
•	Water as needed
Method:
1.  Add all ingredients to blender, and pulse until all 
ingredients form a liquid.
2.  Pour into a small glass to serve.lemon shot(average)anti-inflammatory Eating70
Ingredients:
•	¼ cup fresh blueberries
•	1 cm nub fresh turmeric, peeled
•	½ cm nub fresh ginger, peeled
•	¼ tsp cracked pepper
•	Water as needed
Method:
1.  Add all ingredients to blender, and pulse until all 
ingredients form a liquid.
2.  Pour into a small glass to serve.
Blueberry Shot
Pineapple Shot (p. 69)
Lemon Shot (p. 69) 
Blueberry Shot (p. 70)71
Kale, GinGer,  
Mint and pear 
Smoothie
  Serves 1           10 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 handful kale
•	6 mint leaves
•	1 cm piece ginger, peeled and crushed
•	1 pear, chopped
•	Water and ice cubes as desired
Method:
1.  Combine all in a blender, pulse until smooth.
2.  Serve in a tall glass.
Note: this smoothie is quite pulpy – we leave this in because 
of the fibre it will add to your intake for the day, and the smoothie will leave you feeling more full! You can swap pear 
for pineapple or raspberries, or any fruit you wish.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  536 kJ
Protein:  1.8 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  8.9 g
(swap pear for 
pineapple or raspberries) wheat free vegan vegetarian
fodmapgluten free dairy freeanti-inflammatory Eating72
Special
hoMMus
  1 serve = approximately 10 g           10-15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	2 tbsp sesame seeds
•	400 g can chickpeas, drained and rinsed
•	Juice 1 small lemon
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	½ tsp ground turmeric
•	1 tsp ground cumin seeds
•	½ tsp ground paprika
•	¼ cup extra virgin olive oil
•	1 tbsp water (if needed)
Method:1.  Use a mortar and pestle to break down the sesame seeds.
2.  Place chickpeas, lightly ground sesame seeds, juice of a small lemon, crushed garlic, 
turmeric, cumin, paprika and olive oil into a small food processor and combine for 
1-2 minutes. 
3.  If the mixture is still a little grainy add water, only a very small amount at a time, 
scrape the sides of the food processor and blend further until the dip is to your 
desired consistency.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  87.6 kJ
Protein:  <1 g
Fat:  1.4 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
Enjoy as a dip with crackers or vegetable sticks or use as a delicious spread.ServIng Sugge StIonS:73
Special Hommus 
(p. 72)anti-inflammatory Eating74
Basil, Coriander and Walnut
pesto
  1 serve = approximately 10 g           10-15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 cup fresh basil leaves
•	¼ cup coriander leaves
•	½ cup loosely packed walnuts
•	½ tsp cumin seeds
•	1-2 cloves garlic, crushed
•	30 ml extra virgin olive oil
Method:
1.   Place all ingredients in a small food processor and 
blend until all ingredients are well combined and a 
paste is formed.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  177 kJ
Protein:  <1 g
Fat:  4.2 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free
veganvegetarian gluten free
dairy free
(leave out garlic, 
and use garlic infused olive oil)fodmap
Use as a dip, dressing, coating for meat or fish, or stir 
through pasta.ServIng Sugge StIonS:75
Basil, Coriander  
and Walnut Pesto (p. 74)anti-inflammatory Eating76
Tofu and Cabbage
stir-fry
  Serves 4           10-15 minutes preparation time, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	 ¼ brown onion,  
chopped finely
•	 3 stalks spring onion, 
ends trimmed, and chopped finely
•	500 g firm tofu
•	1 carrot, chopped
•	1 capsicum, chopped
•	 Handful green beans, 
ends trimmed
•	 2 bunches bok choy  
or choy sumPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  936 kJ
Protein:  20.4 g
Fat:  9.8 g
Fibre:  12.3 g
wheat freevegan vegetarian
gluten freedairy free
(use garlic infused 
olive oil and do not include garlic, onion or mushrooms. Only use green part of spring onion)(use gluten free 
soy sauce)(use wheat free 
soy sauce)
fodmapMethod:
1.  In a hot fry pan, brown garlic, onion and spring onion.
2.  Add tofu, then all vegetables, except cabbage. Stir-fry 
ingredients.
3.  Add coriander, basil, ginger and chilli, then add cabbage.
4.  Stir-fry for another minute, or until the cabbage has just 
started to soften. Add small amount of tamari or soy 
sauce if desired.
5.  Serve.•	 1 punnet shitake 
mushrooms, sliced
•	Coriander, to taste
•	Basil, to taste
•	 1 cm nub ginger, 
peeled and grated
•	1 chilli (if desired)
•	 1 ½ cups red cabbage, 
shredded
•	 If desired, small 
amount of tamari  or soy sauce
Serve on a bed of low GI brown rice, or barley.ServIng Sugge StIonS:77
Tofu  
and Cabbage
Stir-fry (p. 76)anti-inflammatory Eating78
tofu and herb
Salad
  Serves 2           10 minutes preparation time, 10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	Rice bran oil spray
•	200 g firm tofu, cut into bite size chunks
•	1 cup red cabbage, shredded
•	10 snow peas, chopped
•	1 carrot, chopped
•	2 celery stalks, chopped
•	10 green beans, chopped
•	Handful each of coriander, basil and mint
•	1 tbsp sesame oil 
•	1 tbsp lime juice
•	½ large red chilli, sliced with seeds removed
Method:1.  Heat fry pan and spray with rice bran oil. Gently stir-fry tofu until well heated, with 
slightly golden edges.
2.  Place salad ingredients and herbs into a bowl, then add tofu.
3.  Combine sesame oil, lime juice and chilli in a small bowl to make the dressing. When 
ready to serve, drizzle over the salad.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1148 kJ
Protein:  15.6 g
Fat:  17 g
Fibre:  12.4 g
wheat free vegan vegetarian
gluten free dairy free
(replace snow peas and 
celery with FODMAP friendly vegetables of your choice)fodmap79
Tofu and Herb
Salad (p. 78)anti-inflammatory Eating80
chunKy lentil 
and Vegetable Soup
  Serves 3-4          30 minutes preparation time, 30 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 leek, finely chopped
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	1.5-2 L water
•	1 ¼ cups dried red lentils, washed
•	1 carrot, roughly chopped
•	 1 medium sweet potato, peeled and roughly chopped
•	1 head broccoli, chopped (include the stalk)
•	1 zucchini, chopped
•	 3 large spinach or silverbeet leaves, de-stalked, chopped 
roughly
•	 1 tsp ground turmeric (or 1 cm nub grated fresh turmeric)
•	Chilli, salt and pepper to taste
•	1 handful of parsleyPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  135 kJ
Protein:  2.5 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  1.8 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian
Method:
1.  Stir-fry leek and garlic in large saucepan for 2-3 minutes or until fragrant.
2.  Add water to the saucepan, then lentils and stir to combine.
3.  Add the carrot, sweet potato, broccoli, zucchini, spinach and turmeric to the saucepan 
and slowly stir.
4.  Season soup mix with salt and pepper and chilli if desired.
5.  Simmer soup for around 30 minutes, stirring occasionally and adding more water as required.
6.  Once all vegetables are softened and cooked through, serve in deep bowls and garnish 
with parsley. 
Note: this recipe is delicious on a cold night, very filling, low in fat and has heaps of nutrients. If you want 
to blend it once it’s cooked so it’s smooth you can, otherwise serve as it is so it’s nice and chunky!(remove garlic, swap 
dried red lentils for canned brown lentils)fodmapvegan81
Chunky Lentil 
and Vegetable Soup 
(p. 80)anti-inflammatory Eating82
KanG aroo
Marinated in Turmeric 
  Serves 2          10 minutes preparation time, 5 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 tbsp peanut or coconut oil (melted)
•	1 tsp turmeric
•	1 tsp grated ginger
•	1 small red chilli, sliced and seeds removed
•	250 g kangaroo fillet, sliced
Method:
1.   Combine oil, turmeric, ginger and chilli in a bowl and 
stir until a paste forms.
2.  Add the kangaroo to marinade and coat well.
3.  Heat fry pan on very high. Add coated kangaroo 
when the pan is very hot and stir-fry meat until nicely 
browned (just a few minutes). Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  867 kJ
Protein:  26.9 g
Fat:  10.4 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
fodmap
If using coconut oil, this tastes delicious with stir-fried Asian greens.ServIng Sugge StIonS:Note:  as it is such a lean meat kangaroo is much tastier when cooked medium rare. If cooked more 
than this, it very easily becomes tough.83
Kangaroo
Marinated in Turmeric (p. 82) anti-inflammatory Eating84
Ginger Poached
chicKen
  Serves 2           10-15 minutes preparation time, 10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 tsp grated ginger
•	1 red chilli, sliced, with seeds removed if desired
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	 1 small chicken breast, sliced into 2 cm thick pieces 
across the grain of the meat
Method:
1.  Bring a saucepan of water to boil.
2.  Combine ginger, chilli and garlic in a bowl.
3.  Rub chicken with the spice mixture, then add to water 
and bring water back to boil until cooked.  This will 
take approximately 5-10 minutes.
4.  Set aside 2-4 tablespoons of cooking water to use as 
a sauce when serving.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  353 kJ
Protein:  16.8 g
Fat:  1.2 g
Fibre:  1.1 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
(leave out garlic, and 
use green part of spring onion as an alternative)fodmap
Serve with steamed Asian greens and shitake mushrooms, and a small portion of brown rice.ServIng Sugge StIonS:85
Ginger Poached
Chicken (p. 84)anti-inflammatory Eating86
fruit s alad 
with Maple and Ginger Drizzle
  Serves 4           15 minutes preparation and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	1 tbsp maple syrup
•	1-2 tsp grated ginger
•	 ½ cup each rockmelon, honeydew melon, watermelon, 
pineapple, kiwi, strawberry and orange, cut into bite size pieces
Method:
1.  Combine the maple syrup and ginger until mixed 
together well.
2.  Place all fruit in a large bowl, then drizzle ginger maple 
dressing over the top.
Note: any other fruits can be used in this recipe, as you wish. Do 
your best to choose options that are in season, as these will be freshest and tastiest!Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  374 kJ
Protein:  1.5 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  4.2 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
(swap watermelon for 
just ripe banana)fodmapvegetarian vegan87
Fruit Salad 
with Maple and Ginger Drizzle 
(p. 86)anti-inflammatory Eating88
stewed rhubarb 
and Pear 
  Serves 4           5-10 minutes preparation time, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	¾ cup water
•	1 bunch rhubarb, washed and chopped into small pieces
•	3 pears, cored and chopped
•	2 star anise
•	½ tsp cinnamon
•	½ tsp grated ginger
Method:
1.  Heat water in a medium size saucepan to boiling.
2.  Add the rhubarb and pear and gently stir.
3.  Sprinkle in herbs and spices.
4.  Reduce heat and simmer, for approximately 10 minutes 
(or until the fruit is soft and broken down), occasionally stirring gently.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  456 kJ
Protein:  2.3 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  7.8 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
(swap pears for 
oranges)fodmapvegetarian vegan89
Stewed Rhubarb 
and Pear (p. 88) anti-inflammatory Eating90
roast Ve Getables 
with Basil and Garlic
  Serves 2           10 minute preparation time, 20 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	Extra virgin or cold pressed olive oil spray
•	 1 carrot, halved length ways and chopped  
into bite size pieces
•	 1 zucchini, halved length ways and chopped  
into bite size pieces
•	4 Brussels  sprouts, halved
•	1 cup sweet potato, chopped into bite size pieces
•	½ bunch asparagus
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	Handful fresh herbs (e.g. parsley, basil, oregano)
•	Cracked pepper
•	2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil 
Method:
1.   Preheat fan-forced oven to 150°C.
2.  Line oven tray with foil, and spray lightly with olive oil.
3.  Arrange chopped vegetables on tray.
4.  Sprinkle vegetables with garlic, herbs and cracked pepper.
5.  Drizzle olive oil over vegetable and herb mix.
6.  Roast in oven for 15-20 minutes, or until cooked.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  942 kJ
Protein:  3.9 g
Fat:  19 g
Fibre:  6.9 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian
(remove garlic, use 
garlic infused oil, and swap asparagus for green beans)fodmapvegan91
Roast Vegetables 
with Basil and Garlic  
(p. 90)anti-inflammatory Eating92
grainsANDLegumes93
quinoa porridge
  Serves 1           5 minutes preparation, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 ¼ cup quinoa uncooked,  
or ½ cup quinoa cooked and cooled
•	2 tbsp natural yoghurt 
•	4 strawberries, sliced
•	10 almonds, crushed
•	Cinnamon, small sprinkle
•	1 tsp chia seeds
•	1 tsp sunflower seeds
Method:
1.  If using uncooked quinoa, combine ¼ cup quinoa 
with ½ cup water in a saucepan. Bring to a boil. 
Cover, reduce heat to low, and simmer until quinoa is 
tender. This will take approximately 15 minutes. 
2.  Mix quinoa with yoghurt, 3 of the strawberries, the 
chia seeds, sunflower seeds and the almonds.
3.  Sprinkle cinnamon on top, and add the last 
strawberry whole or sliced.
4.  Serve.
Note:  if you wish, quinoa can be served hot, otherwise, cook a 
little extra the night before and cool in fridge overnight ready to 
go in the morning (and either serve cold or reheated).Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1226 kJ
Protein:  12.8 g
Fat:  11.2 g
Fibre:  6.9 g
wheat free vegetarian gluten free
dairy free
(use lactose free 
yoghurt, and low FODMAP nuts)(use dairy free 
yoghurt)
fodmapanti-inflammatory Eating94
breakfast salad
  Serves 2           15 minutes preparation time, 60 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	½ cup pearl barley
•	1 cup water
•	Drizzle of extra virgin olive oil (to coat pan)
•	1.5 cups mushrooms, sliced
•	2 cups baby spinach leaves
•	½ avocado, chopped
•	2 sprigs of dill or rosemary, torn
•	20 g fetta cheese
•	Cracked pepper
Method:1.  Wash barley, then cook in rice cooker or saucepan 
(covered) in 1 cup water for approximately 45 minutes. Add more water if required.
2.  Heat the fry pan and add olive oil, coating the base of 
the pan. Sauté mushrooms over low heat.
3.  Divide the baby spinach and chopped avocado evenly 
between 2 bowls. 
4.  Once the barley and mushrooms are cooked, add to 
spinach and avocado mix, along with the herbs. 
5.  Crumble fetta on top and if desired, drizzle with a little 
extra virgin olive oil. Add cracked pepper to taste.
Note: to save time, cook a batch of barley ahead of time. Barley 
will keep in the fridge for 3 days.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1536 kJ
Protein:  10.8 g
Fat:  17.3 g
Fibre:  12.7 g
wheat free vegetarian
gluten free
dairy free(swap barley for quinoa, 
buckwheat, brown rice or sweet potato)
(leave out fetta, 
or swap for dairy free cheese)95
Breakfast  
Salad (p. 94)anti-inflammatory Eating96
easy edamame
  1 serve is equal to approximately ½ cup
           5 minutes preparation time, 5 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 Frozen edamame (you will be able to find these in 
Asian supermarkets, Coles and Harris Farm)
•	Water
Method:
1.  Boil water, then add edamame (in pods) and boil 
for approximately five minutes or until the pods go bright green.
2.  Once cooked, drain the beans and cool them under 
cold water.
3.  Use your fingers to squeeze the pod for the 
edamame bean to come out, or use your mouth to 
pop them straight in.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  294 kJ
Protein:  5.8 g
Fat:  <1 g
Fibre:  5.6 g
vegetarian gluten free dairy free
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Prior to serving, add any of the following to add some extra flavour: 
•	 Coarse sea salt
•	 Chilli flakes and lime juice
•	 Coriander, sesame oil and grated ginger97
Easy Edamame (p. 96)anti-inflammatory Eating98
Warm quinoa  
and lentil s alad 
with Roasted Vegetables and Asparagus 
  Serves 4 as a main or 8 as a side dish
          30 minutes preparation time, 60 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 3 carrots  
cut into 3 cm pieces
•	 1 large sweet potato, 
peeled and cut  into 2-3 cm cubes
•	 2 small beetroots, skin 
removed and cut  into 2-3 cm cubes
•	1 cup dry quinoa
•	2 cups water
•	1 tbsp extra virgin olive oilPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  2108 kJ
Protein:  19.8 g
Fat:  8.3 g
Fibre:  21.3 g
wheat freevegan vegetarian
gluten freedairy free
Method:
1.  Preheat oven to 200°C. Line a baking tray with baking paper and spread carrots, sweet 
potato and beetroot pieces over the tray (optional: drizzle with olive oil and sprinkle 
mixed herbs over vegetables). Roast for 50 minutes – 1 hour.
2.  Once vegetables have been in the oven for 30 minutes, place the quinoa and water 
in a saucepan on medium-high heat. Bring to boil then simmer until all the water is 
absorbed, stirring occasionally. Once cooked, transfer to a heat-proof bowl and stir 
with a fork to make fluffy.
3.  Meanwhile, heat olive oil in a fry pan. Cook onion and garlic until lightly browned. Add 
capsicum pieces and cook for 3-4 minutes. 
4.  Heat another small fry pan or griddle pan to cook the asparagus, turning occasionally 
to cook evenly.
5.  Now all ingredients will be cooked or prepared. Add the onion, capsicum and roasted 
vegetables to the cooked quinoa. Also add the rinsed lentils and stir to combine. You can add some dried or fresh herbs at this point for extra flavour. 
6.  Serve warm quinoa and lentil salad with the cooked asparagus spears.•	1 medium onion diced
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	 1 capsicum  
(red or green) cut into 
small pieces
•	 3 bunches of 
asparagus, ends removed
•	 400 g can brown lentils 
drained and rinsed99
Warm Quinoa and Lentil Salad 
with Roasted Vegetables  
and Asparagus (p. 98) anti-inflammatory Eating100
Chickpea and 
roast Vegetable
salad
  Serves 2           15 minutes preparation time, 20-30 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	¼ Jap pumpkin, cut into small pieces
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	Mixed herbs
•	2 tsp extra virgin olive oil 
•	4 roma tomatoes, quartered
•	½ bag baby spinach leaves
•	400 g can chickpeas, rinsed and drained
•	6 cherry bocconcini, torn into pieces
Method:1.  Pre-heat oven to 180°C.
2.  Half cook pumpkin in microwave – put in a container or 
heat-proof bowl with a dash of water, cover and cook for 
roughly 5 minutes.
3.  Place the pumpkin in plastic bag with the garlic, herbs, 
and half the olive oil. Shake until pumpkin is covered.
4.  Line a baking tray with foil or baking paper and spread 
seasoned pumpkin over it. Place the tomatoes on this tray too and sprinkle with a little more garlic and herbs 
and the rest of the oil. 
5.  Bake for 20 minutes or until cooked.
6.  Place baby spinach leaves into two bowls, add 
chickpeas, roasted vegetables and torn bocconcini.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1994 kJ
Protein:  26.7 g
Fat:  20.5 g
Fibre:  17.3 g
wheat free vegetarian gluten free
dairy free
(swap chickpeas for 
lentils, leave out garlic and use garlic infused olive oil)(leave out bocconcini, 
or replace with dairy free cheese)
fodmap101
Chickpea and 
Roast Vegetable Salad (p. 100)anti-inflammatory Eating102
Homemade 
Baked Beans
  Serves 2          5 minutes preparation time, 5-10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	Rice bran oil spray
•	 Herbs and spices: your choice of garlic, basil, rosemary, 
turmeric, pepper etc.
•	400 g can crushed tomatoes
•	400 g can red kidney beans, drained and rinsed
Method:
1.  Spray a small or medium sized fry pan with oil.
2.  Add your chosen herbs and spices to the pan and heat 
until aromatic.
3.  Add crushed tomatoes then kidney beans, heat through 
and stir until just boiling, then remove from heat.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  706 kJ
Protein:  7.2 g
Fat:  5.4 g
Fibre:  7.9 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
vegetarian vegan
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Serve with a slice of wholegrain toast if desired. You can add other vegetables in as well such as spinach, mushroom and zucchini.103
Homemade 
Baked Beans (p. 102)anti-inflammatory Eating104
Cannellini bean
Mash
  Serves 2          10 minutes preparation time, 10 minutes cooking time 
(canned beans) or 35-45 minutes cooking time (dried beans)
Ingredients:
•	 ½ cup dried cannellini beans (or 400 g can 
cannellini beans)
•	2-4 tsp extra virgin olive oil 
•	Cracked pepper to taste
•	Rosemary or thyme to taste
Method:
1.  Soak ½ cup of cannellini beans over night, then 
boil until soft. Alternatively, if canned beans are used, rinse and drain beans, then heat in hot water.
2.  Add beans to blender, along with pepper and 
herbs, and blend until smooth.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  749 kJ
Protein:  8.8 g
Fat:  5.5 g
Fibre:  9.2 g
dairy free wheat free gluten free
vegetarian vegan105
Cannellini Bean Mash  
(p. 104)anti-inflammatory Eating106
Pork and Lentil 
san CHoy b au
  Serves 2 as a main or 4 as a starter          
  15 minutes preparation time, 10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	Rice bran oil spray
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	200 g lean pork mince
•	2 chillis (depending on how hot you like it)
•	1 tsp ginger, grated
•	3 basil leaves, torn
•	1 carrot, diced
•	4 shitake mushrooms, diced
•	1 tsp soy sauce (reduced salt)
•	1 tsp oyster sauce
•	400 g can brown lentils, drained and rinsed
•	8 x iceberg lettuce leaves
Method:
1.   Lightly spray a hot pan with rice bran oil.
2.  Stir-fry garlic and pork mince for 5 minutes.
3.  Add chilli, ginger, basil, carrot and mushrooms and stir until combined.
4.  Add soy and oyster sauce, stir until combined and nearly cooked.
5.  Add lentils, combine with rest of the ingredients, cook for another minute.
6.  Spoon mixture into lettuce cups.
Note:  place the mushrooms in the sun for an hour prior to cooking (this can be done when you get 
home from the shops, then put them back in the bag in the fridge). Mushrooms develop vitamin D 
when in the sun; 100g of mushrooms in the sun for 1 hour will provide approximately 25% of your 
daily vitamin D needs.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1617 kJ
Protein:  30.9 g
Fat:  16.2 g
Fibre:  10.2 g
wheat freegluten freedairy free
(if GF sauces are used)
(if wheat free sauces 
are used)(when split for 2 serves)107
Pork and Lentil 
San Choy Bau (p. 106)anti-inflammatory Eating108
beef and 
buCkWHeat s alad
  Serves 4          10-15 minutes preparation time, 45 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 700 g sweet potato cut into small pieces  
(peeling optional)
•	 1 large red capsicum, deseeded and cut into moderate 
size pieces
•	 1 large red onion, cut into rough slices
•	Olive oil spray
•	 1 tsp cumin seeds, roughly ground in mortar and pestle
•	1 cup raw buckwheat
•	 1 tbsp wholegrain seeded mustard
•	 400-500 g lean beef steak
•	 1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
•	 1 tbsp balsamic vinegarPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1825 kJ
Protein:  32.2 g
Fat:  12.8 g
Fibre:  10.4 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
Method:
1.  Pre-heat oven to 220°C. Line 1-2 baking trays with paper and spread sweet potato, 
capsicum and onion over the trays. Spray vegetables with olive oil and sprinkle with half the ground cumin seeds. Place in oven and roast for 40 minutes or until lightly browned.
2.  Boil a small saucepan of water. While waiting, heat a small non-stick fry pan and add 
the raw buckwheat. Toast for 3 minutes, then add buckwheat to boiling water. Reduce heat to medium and simmer for 5 minutes or until just cooked. Drain, rinse with cold water then spread on a tray to allow buckwheat to cool.
3.  Heat a barbeque/grill to high. Spread half the wholegrain mustard over the steak and 
place on grill, then spread remaining mustard on the reverse side. Cook steak for approximately 5 minutes on each side or until cooked medium rare, set aside to rest.
4.  Combine olive oil, balsamic vinegar and remaining cumin seeds in a small bowl and 
mix well.
5.  Place cooked vegetables and buckwheat in a bowl, combine, and add dressing. 
6.  Serve buckwheat and vegetable mix onto plates, and place thinly sliced beef over the 
top of the salad.(leave out onion, and 
reduce quantity of sweet potato to 400 g.  The amount of balsamic vinegar used is unlikely to affect most people)fodmap109
Beef and 
Buckwheat Salad (p. 108)anti-inflammatory Eating110
10 Hour 
lamb sHanks
  Serves 4          30 minutes preparation time, 10 hours cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 Drizzle extra virgin 
olive oil (to grease  slow cooker)
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	2 lamb shanks
•	1 leek, finely chopped
•	1 cup dried red lentils
•	1 ½ zucchini, chopped
•	 1 head broccoli, 
choppedPer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1798 kJ
Protein:  31.7 g
Fat:  13.7 g
Fibre:  9.7 g
wheat free gluten free dairy free
Method:
1.   With the slow cooker turned onto ‘sear’ mode heat olive oil, then sauté garlic and sear 
lamb shanks, turning until the outside is lightly browned. If your slow cooker does not have ‘sear’ mode, heat a non-stick fry pan and follow steps 1 and 2. When completed, transfer lamb shanks and leek into slow cooker and continue with step 3.
2.  Add leek, and sear for a further 3-5 minutes.
3.  Turn off sear mode. Add lentils, other vegetables, crushed tomato, wine and water. 
Then add herbs and spices.
4.  Mix ingredients through so that the lamb shanks are immersed in the combined 
vegetable and herb sauce.
5.  Place lid on slow cooker and cook for 10 hours on low.•	 1 can crushed 
tomatoes (preferably No Added Salt)
•	Dash red wine
•	300 mL water
•	 1 handful parsley, 
loosely chopped
•	 1 cm nub fresh 
turmeric, peeled and 
chopped finely
•	Cracked pepper
(if garlic infused olive 
oil used, and the green part of the leek only)fodmap
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
On its own, with mashed sweet potato, or cannellini bean mash (page 104).111
10 Hour 
Lamb Shanks (p. 110)anti-inflammatory Eating112
fish113
ceviche
  Serves 4 as a main with salad, or 6-8 as a starter         
  10 minutes preparation time, 1-2 hours setting time
Ingredients:
•	 500 g white fish (such as barramundi, ling or snapper), 
cut into bite size chunks
•	4 limes, juiced
•	2 lemons, juiced
•	½ red onion, sliced
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	1 red chilli, sliced, seeds removed if desired
Method:
1.  Combine all ingredients in a bowl. 
2.  Cover and refrigerate for 1-2 hours.
3.  Serve.
Note:  this South American recipe is traditionally made with celery, 
and served with sweet corn, sweet potato and green salad.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  627 kJ
Protein:  25.2 g
Fat:  2.1 g
Fibre:  4.1 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(replace garlic and 
onion with green part of spring onion)fodmappescatariananti-inflammatory Eating114
AsiAn style 
Crab and Mung Bean Salad
 Serves 2 as a main or 4 as an entre         
  15 minutes preparation time, 5 minutes cooking and assembly time
Ingredients:
•	50 g chopped peanuts
•	1 tsp brown sugar
•	2 tbsp fish sauce
•	2 tbsp lime juice
•	1 large red chilli, sliced and seeds removed
•	300 g fresh crab meat
•	150 g green beans, ends trimmed
•	150 g mung beans
•	15 cm piece cucumber, sliced
•	1 carrot, diced
•	50 g bean sprouts
•	½ red capsicum, sliced
•	1 spring onion, thinly sliced
•	1 tbsp lemon grass, finely chopped
•	Handful coriander, loosely chopped
•	10 mint leaves
•	10 basil leaves
Method:1.  Toast nuts in oven, or dry fry in pan until golden and crunchy.
2.  Combine sugar, fish sauce, lime juice and chilli in a large salad bowl. Stir until sugar 
is dissolved.
3.  Add crab meat, other vegetables/salad, and herbs and spices into the large bowl and 
toss until all components are combined and nicely coated with dressing.
4.  Portion salad onto separate plates or bowls and sprinkle toasted nuts over each serve.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  863 kJ
Protein:  15.7 g
Fat:  8 g
Fibre:  7.8 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(only use green part of 
spring onion)fodmappescatarian115
Asian Style 
Crab and Mung Bean Salad  
(p. 114)anti-inflammatory Eating116
Portuguese Style 
sArdines in P Arsley 
And G Arlic
  Serves 2
           15 minutes preparation time, 1-2 hours rest time, 10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 6 fresh sardines (stores at the Sydney Fish Market 
stock these)
•	 1 tbsp flat leaf parsley, chopped
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	 Extra virgin olive oil to drizzle
•	 Cracked pepper and a touch of salt, to taste
Method:
1.  Scale and gut the sardines (you can have your 
fishmonger do this). 
2.  Wash the sardines under cold water and pat dry with 
paper towels. 
3.  Place sardines in a mixing bowl, or large tray. 
4.  Combine parsley, garlic and olive oil, then pour 
mixture over sardines. Add cracked pepper, and a little salt (if desired).
5.  Refrigerate for 1-2 hours.
6.  Remove sardines from fridge, and heat grill or fry pan.
7.  Place the sardines on grill/pan. 
8.  Cook each side of sardines for approximately 3-4 
minutes. The fish should come off the bones easily.
9.  Place 3 sardines on each plate.
 Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  841 kJ
Protein:  29.6 g
Fat:  8.9 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(if leave out garlic, 
and use garlic infused olive oil)fodmappescatarian
Notes: sardines are one 
of the richest sources of omega 3, a moderately 
sustainable fish, and are 
incredibly cost effective. If your fishmonger doesn’t stock sardines, other small 
fish, such as garfish, can be 
used instead.
This recipe is based on 
a traditional Portuguese recipe Chloe was lucky enough to try on a recent 
trip to Portugal.117
Portuguese Style 
Sardines in Parsley and Garlic
(p. 116)anti-inflammatory Eating118
Orange, Fennel and Coriander Seed 
trout
  Serves 2           15 minutes preparation time, 20 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 x 120 g fillets ocean trout
•	1/3 fennel bulb, sliced into big chunks
•	4 slices orange, sliced thinly
•	2 tsp coriander seeds
•	Generous drizzle extra virgin olive oil
Method:
1.  Preheat oven to 180°C.
2.  Line baking dish with foil, and lightly drizzle with olive oil.
3.  Place fish in an oven proof baking dish.
4.  Arrange fennel around fish, then sprinkle coriander 
seeds over both fillets.
5.  Generously drizzle with more olive oil.
6.  Place orange slices on top of fish.
7.  Cover with foil.
8.  Cook for approximately 20 minutes.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1650 kJ
Protein:  26.4 g
Fat:  24.9 g
Fibre:  3.8 g
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Works well with Roast Vegetables with Basil and Garlic (page 90), or with the 
Pomegranate salad (page 27).wheat free gluten free
dairy free fodmappescatarian119
Orange, Fennel  
and Coriander Seed Trout (p. 118)anti-inflammatory Eating120
dukkAh 
Crusted Fish
  Serves 4          15 minutes preparation time, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	¼ cup almonds
•	¼ cup walnuts
•	¼ cup pistachios
•	1 tbsp sunflower seeds
•	1 tbsp pepitas
•	½ tsp cumin seeds
•	½ tsp paprika
•	¼ tsp turmeric
•	4 x 120-150 g fillets of Perch or other white fish
•	1 egg, lightly beaten
•	Extra virgin olive oil
Method:1.  Place nuts, seeds and spices in a food processor and blend until combined and 
ground to a grainy consistently, though not ground too fine. Spread nut and seed dukkah mixture onto a plate.
2.  Individually coat each piece of fish in the egg wash, then coat with nut and seed 
crumb and set aside.
3.  Heat a fry pan on medium-high heat. Lightly grease fry pan with olive oil. Add fish to 
the pan and cook on each side for 2-3 minutes depending on thickness of the fish.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1288 kJ
Protein:  30.5 g
Fat:  2.1 g
Fibre:  2.3 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(choose low 
FODMAP nuts)fodmappescatarian
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Serve with salad or Asian greens.121
Dukkah  
Crusted Fish (p. 120)anti-inflammatory Eating122
turmeric snAPPer
  Serves 2          5-10 minutes preparation time, 5-10 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	1 ½ tsp of turmeric
•	1 clove garlic, crushed
•	2 tbsp extra virgin olive oil
•	2 snapper fillets (approximately 120-150 g each)
Method:1.  Combine turmeric, crushed garlic and olive oil in a bowl 
to form a paste.
2.  Coat snapper fillets with paste.
3.  Pan fry in a hot pan (no extra oil is necessary) for 2-3 
minutes on each side, or until cooked through.
4.  Serve with mixed salad or vegetables.
Note: a delicious alternative is adding finely chopped basil, 
coriander or parsley to the paste.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1202 kJ
Protein:  24.6 g
Fat:  20.5 g
Fibre:  <1 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(use garlic infused 
olive oil and remove garlic)fodmappescatarian123
Turmeric Snapper  
(p. 122)anti-inflammatory Eating124
bAked s Almon
  Serves 2          20 minutes preparation time, 20 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	2 x 120 g fillet of salmon
•	Cracked pepper
•	Salt to taste
•	2 cloves garlic, crushed
•	Sprinkling of fresh rosemary
•	10 basil leaves 
•	Punnet of cherry tomatoes, halved
•	½ small red onion, finely chopped
•	2 tsp lemon juice
•	2 tsp lime juice
•	Extra virgin olive oil to drizzle
Method:1.  Preheat oven to 200°C.
2.  Line a baking dish with a large sheet of foil. Place salmon on top of foil and sprinkle 
with salt and pepper, then rub crushed garlic onto salmon.
3.  Arrange the rosemary, basil leaves, cherry tomatoes and thin slices of onion on top of 
the salmon.
4.  Pour lemon and lime juice over the top and drizzle of olive oil, then wrap foil around all 
ingredients like a parcel.
5.  Bake in the oven for 20 minutes.Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1307 kJ
Protein:  26.8 g
Fat:  20.8 g
Fibre:  2.4 g
wheat free gluten free
dairy free
(use garlic infused 
olive oil, and remove garlic and onion)fodmappescatarian125
Baked Salmon  
(p. 124)anti-inflammatory Eating126
Chloe’s Dad’s Whole Roasted 
AtlAntic sAlmon
  Serves approximately 20 people (each serving portion is approximately 4-5 cm wide 
along the body)          15 minutes preparation, 50 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 5 kg whole  
Atlantic Salmon 
•	1 lemon, sliced
•	2 tbsp olive oil
•	 150 mL water or soda 
water, (or good quality 
white wine if you wish)Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  826 kJ
Protein:  19.2 g
Fat:  13.3 g
Fibre:  <1 g(approximately)to add flavour, choose any  
combination of the following, to taste:
•	 Sliced mango 
•	 Sliced papaya 
•	 Sliced ginger 
•	 Freshly chopped chives,  
basil and/or coriander
•	 Crushed garlic
Method:
1.  Take enough foil to wrap a loose parcel around the fish. 
Place the fish on the foil on the BBQ. Take care to keep the foil in one piece, with no holes.gluten free dairy free
(if no garlic or 
mango is used)fodmappescatarian
2.  Add lemon and olive oil.
3.  If desired, add your choice of ingredients from the list above.
4.  Fold edges of foil above and to the side of the fish, to make an enclosed parcel, 
leaving enough space for the foil to expand to look like a pillow. Just before the parcel is sealed add 150 mL water, soda water or wine into the foil cavity. 
5.  Set the BBQ on high and cook fish parcel with the hood closed for approximately 45 
to 50 minutes. 
6.  At approximately 45 minutes open the hood to see a puffed foil pillow. With a sharp 
knife cut along the foil pillow across the top to expose the fish (be careful as it will let 
out hot steam).
7.  Fold back the foil and place the flat of the knife on the side of the fish. It should be 
firm but soft.
8.  Close the hood and continue to cook for approximately 15 minutes to allow the skin 
to become crispy.
9.  To serve, re open hood, turn off the BBQ and fold away the foil to allow access to serve 
directly from the BBQ to the plates. The skin can be cut along the back bone and the flesh lifted from the bones.127
Note: The tastiest piece is near the fish head just 
near the eyes and towards the tail about 30 mm.
When the top half of the salmon has been served lift 
the skeleton from the tail end first and then serve the second (bottom) side.
If you have any left overs the salmon will last for up to 3 
days when left covered in the fridge. 
This recipe is best done in a large BBQ with a hood, 
however is also possible to do in your oven if the fish will fit.
This recipe can easily be modified to be made for less 
people, using either a smaller whole fish, or enough 
fillets of fish for the portions you require, for example if you are making for four people, using four appropriately sized fish fillets, the same ingredients to taste (but much less), and then cook as for the baked salmon.ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Serve with steamed vegetables 
or a salad (any of the recipes in this book are appropriate).
If you are using as left overs, it 
can be served in a salad (such 
as in place of chicken in a Caesar salad with walnuts and chunks of avocado).
Chloe’s Dad’s Whole Roasted 
Atlantic Salmon (p. 126)anti-inflammatory Eating128
Special 
bAked fish
  Serves 4          10 minutes preparation time, 15 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	100 g sundried tomatoes
•	1/3 cup fresh basil leaves
•	 1 spring onion,  
thinly sliced
•	1 tbsp sunflower seeds
•	1 tbsp pepitas Per Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  2068 kJ
Protein:  32.6 g
Fat:  34.3 g
Fibre:  5.4 g
(check ingredients of 
sundried tomatoes, use suitable nuts and only the green part of the spring onion)fodmapMethod:
1.  Pre-heat oven to 200°C, and place a medium to large 
oven-proof fry pan or skillet on high heat.
2.  Place all ingredients except the salmon into a small 
food processor and blend until well combined and nuts are crumbed.
3.  Lightly spray pan with olive oil and place the fish skin 
side down into the pan to sear and seal. Cook for 2-3 minutes on high so skin becomes delicious and crispy.
ServIng Sugge StIonS:
Tastes fantastic with mashed peas and charred asparagus spears.wheat free gluten free
dairy freepescatarian•	 ½ cup mixed walnuts, 
pistachio and cashews
•	 1 tbsp extra virgin  
olive oil
•	Olive oil spray
•	 4 x 120 g fillets of fresh 
salmon or ocean trout
4.  Turn off heat and spoon even amounts of tomato, nut and seed mixture from the food 
processor onto each piece of fish.
5.  Place fish in the oven and cook for 5-10 minutes or until cooked to your liking. Fish 
would ideally flake when tested with a fork. Crumb should be nice and toasted on top.
6.  Serve hot.
Note: as an alternative the to the nut and seed topping, the basil, coriander and walnut pesto recipe 
(page 74) can also be used.129
Special Baked Fish (p. 128)anti-inflammatory Eating130
sAlmon  
And snAPPer Pie
  Serves 4          30 minutes preparation time, 20-25 minutes cooking time
Ingredients:
•	 ½ medium sweet potato, peeled and cut into medium 
pieces (approximately 200 g)
•	 ¼ cauliflower, cut into florets (approximately 200 g)
•	 1 tbsp margarine or olive oil
•	 300 g salmon (skinless and boneless)
•	 300 g snapper (or white fish of your choice, skinless 
and boneless)
•	 ½ brown onion, chopped finely
•	 2 tbsp gluten free flour
•	 185 ml Lite ‘n’ Creamy Evaporated milk
•	3/4 cup skim milk
•	 ½ bunch of English spinach, ends trimmed
•	 ½ cup of parsley, chopped finely
•	2 tbsp dill, chopped finely
•	1 bay leaf
•	 ¼ cup shaved parmesan cheesePer Serve ProvIde S:
SuItable for:Energy:  1975 kJ
Protein:  44.6 g
Fat:  18.4 g
Fibre:  6.5 g
Method:
1.  Preheat oven to 180°C.
2.  Put sweet potato and cauliflower into a bowl and microwave for 10 minutes OR place 
into a steamer over a saucepan of boiling water and cook (with lid on) for 10 minutes, 
or until tender. Transfer into a food processer or container for a hand held stick blender and puree (until smooth with no lumps). Set to the side.
3.  In a heated fry pan melt the margarine and when lightly bubbling add the fish and 
cook for a few minutes on each side until just cooked through. Remove fish from fry 
pan when cooked and place on a plate. Use a fork to flake fish into smaller pieces.
4.  In the same saucepan lightly brown the onion. Add in flour and gradually pour in 
evaporated and skim milk. Simmer until sauce thickens.wheat free gluten free pescatarian131
5.  Add spinach, parsley, dill and bay leaf, and stir through for 3-4 minutes until spinach 
has wilted.
6.  Add fish back in, stir all ingredients together and season with pepper.  
Remove bay leaf before transferring mixture for baking.
7.  Transfer mixture into 4 medium sized ramekins or a 1.5 L oven proof baking dish. 
Spoon the sweet potato and cauliflower puree over the top and sprinkle with parmesan cheese. Bake for 20-25 minutes.
Salmon  
and Snapper Pie (p. 130)anti-inflammatory Eating132
Autoimmune and Inflammatory Disease 
Aggarwal, B.B., and Heber, D. (2014). Immunonutrition. Boca Raton: CRC Press, Taylor and Francis
Bosma-den Boer et al. (2012). Chronic inflammatory diseases are stimulated by current lifestyle: how 
diet, stress levels and medication prevent our body from recovering. Nutrition and Metabolism. 9:32 
http://www.nutritionandmetabolism.com/content/9/1/32 
Hemshekhar, M, Thushara, R.M, Jnaneshwari, S, Devaraja, S, Kemparaju, K, & Girish, K.S. (2013). 
Attenuation of adjuvant-induced arthritis by dietary sesamol via modulation of inflammatory mediators, extracellular matrix degrading enzymes and antioxidant status. European Journal of Nutrition. 52(7), 1787-1799. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00394-012-0482-6
Kriegel, M.A. et al. (2011). Does Vitamin D affect risk of developing autoimmune disease?: A systematic 
review. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism. Volume 40, Issue 6, 512 - 531.e8
Li, S, Micheletti, R. (2011). Role of diet in rheumatic disease, Rheum Dis Clin N Am. 37, 119–
133 doi:10.1016/j.rdc.2010.11.006 
Pattison, D.J. et al. (2004). Dietary risk factors for the development of inflammatory polyarthritis: 
Evidence for a role of high level of red meat consumption. Arthritis Rheum 50.12: 3804-3812
Rovenský, J. et al. (2009). The effects of B-glucan isolated from pleurotus ostreatus on methotrexate 
treatment in rats with adjuvant arthritis. Rheumatol Int 31.4: 507-511
Sundström, B, Wållberg-Jonsson, S, and Johansson, G. (2010). Diet, disease activity, and gastrointestinal 
symptoms in patients with ankylosing spondylitis. Clin Rheumatol. 30.1: 71-76
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Hagen KB, Byfuglien MG, Falzon L, Olsen SU, Smedslund G. (2009). Dietary interventions for rheumatoid arthritis. Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews. Issue 1. Art. No.: CD006400. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD006400.pub2
Lee, Y. et al. (2012). Omega-3 poly-unsaturated fatty acids and the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A 
meta-analysis. Archives of Medical Research. Volume 43.  Issue 5, 356 – 362
Alipour, B. et al. (2014). Effects of lactobacillus casei supplementation on disease activity and 
inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis patients: A randomised double-blind clinical trial. International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases 
Vaghef-Mehrabany, E. et al. (2014). Probiotic supplementation improves inflammatory status in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Nutrition 30.4: 430-435
McDougall, J., et al. (2002). Effects of a very low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. 
The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 8.1: 71-75references133
Psoriasis and Psoriatic Arthritis
Cañete, J.D,  Mease, P. (2012). The link between obesity and psoriatic arthritis. Ann Rheum Dis. August. 
Vol 71, No 8
Li, W, Han, J, Qureshi, A.A. (2012). Obesity and risk of incident psoriatic arthritis in US women. Annals 
of the Rheumatic Diseases. Volume: 71, Issue: 8, Pages: 1267-1272   
Ricketts, J.R., Rothe, M.J, and Grant-Kels, J.M. (2010). Nutrition and psoriasis. Clinics in Dermatology. 
28.6: 615-626
Russolillo, A. et al. (2012). Obesity and psoriatic arthritis: From pathogenesis to clinical outcome and 
management. Rheumatology. 52.1: 62-67
Solis, M. et al. (2012). Nutritional status and food intake of patients with systemic psoriasis and 
psoriatic arthritis associated. Einstein. São Paulo. 10.1: 44-52
Obesity and miscellaneous conditions
Chang, H, Huang, C, Yeh, D, Wang, S, Peng, C, Wang, C. (2013). Oat prevents obesity and abdominal fat distribution, and improves liver function in humans. Plant Foods For Human Nutrition [serial online]. March;68(1):18-23
Eftekhar Sadat, B. et al. (2013). Effects of sesame seed supplementation on clinical signs and 
symptoms in patients with knee osteoarthritis. International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases. 16.5: 578-582
Ferdowsian, H.R, Barnard, N.D, Hoover, V.J, Katcher, H.I, Levin, S.M, Green, A.A, and Cohen, J.L. (2010).  
A multicomponent intervention reduces body weight and cardiovascular risk at a GEICO corporate site. American Journal of Health Promotion.  July/August, Vol. 24, No. 6, pp. 384-387, doi: 10.4278/
ajhp.081027-QUAN-255
Hampton, T. (2008). Sugar Substitutes Linked to Weight Gain. JAMA. May 14, Vol 299, No. 18 
Jenkins D.J, Kendall C.W, Marchie A. et al. (2005). Direct comparison of a dietary portfolio of cholesterol-
lowering foods with a statin in hypercholesterolemic participants. Am J Clin Nutr. ;81(2):380-387
Kantor E.D, Lampe J.W, Kratz M, White E. (2013). Lifestyle factors and inflammation: Associations by 
body mass index. PLoS ONE 8(7): e67833. DOI: 10.1371/ journal.pone.0067833 
Madhu, K., Chanda, K, and Saji, M.J. (2012). Safety and efficacy of curcuma longa extract 
in the treatment of painful knee osteoarthritis: A randomised placebo-controlled trial. 
Inflammopharmacology. 21.2: 129-136
Ray, K.K. et al. (2007). Synergistic relationship between hyperglycaemia and inflammation with 
respect to clinical outcomes in non-ST-elevation acute coronary syndromes: Analyses from OPUS-TIMI 16 and TACTICS-TIMI 18. European Heart Journal 28.7: 806-813
Rossi, A, Di Lollo, A.C, Guzzo, M.P, Giacomelli, C, Atzeni, F, Bazzichi, L, Di Franco, M. (2015). Fibromyalgia 
and nutrition: what news?. Clin Exp Rheumatol.  Jan-Feb;33, (1 Suppl 88):S117-25
Spencer, E.A, Appleby, P.N, Davey, G.K, Key, T.J. (2003). Diet and body mass index in 38,000 EPIC-
Oxford meat-eaters, fish-eaters, vegetarians, and vegans. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. ;27(6):728-734
Strate, L.L, Liu, Y.L, Syngal, S, Aldoori, W.H, Giovannucci, E.L. (2008). Nut, corn, and popcorn consumption 
and the incidence of diverticular disease. JAMA.;300(8):907-914. doi:10.1001/jama.300.8.907anti-inflammatory Eating134
Cancer
World Cancer Research Fund / American Institute for Cancer Research. (2007). Food, nutrition, 
physical activity, and the prevention of cancer: A global perspective. Washington DC: AICR 
Orlich, M. J., et.al. (2015) Vegetarian dietary patterns and the risk of colorectal cancers. JAMA Internal 
Medicine. 175(5), 767–776. http://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.59
Dairy
Bordoni, A. et al. (2015). Dairy products and inflammation: A review of the clinical evidence. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition. 00-00
Fish/Omega 3 fatty acids
Australia’s Sustainable Seafood Guide, Accessed November 2015, www.sustainableseafood.org.au
Beydoun, M.A. et al. (2015). Associations of the ratios of N-3 To N-6 dietary fatty acids with longitudinal 
changes in depressive symptoms among US women. American Journal of Epidemiology. 181.9:691-705
Calder, P.C,  and Grimble, R.F. (2002). Poly-unsaturated fatty acids, inflammation and immunity. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition. 56, Suppl 3, S14–S19 
Lee, Y. et al. (2012). Omega-3 poly-unsaturated fatty acids and the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis: A 
meta-analysis. Archives of Medical Research. Volume 43.  Issue 5, 356 – 362
Turunen, A.W. et al. (2013). Fish consumption, omega-3 fatty acids, and environmental contaminants 
in relation to low-grade inflammation and early atherosclerosis. Environmental Research 120: 43-54
Xun, P, and He, K. (2012). Fish consumption and incidence of diabetes: Meta-analysis of data from 
438,000 individuals in 12 independent prospective cohorts with an average 11-year follow-up. Diabetes Care. 35(4), 930–938. http://doi.org/10.2337/dc11-1869
Yu, X.F., Zou, J., and Dong, J. (2014). Fish consumption and risk of gastrointestinal cancers: A 
meta-analysis of cohort studies. World Journal of Gastroenterology, 20(41), 15398–15412. http://doi.
org/10.3748/wjg.v20.i41.15398
General Nutrition and Statistics
Australian Bureau of Statistics (4338.0), http://www.abs.gov.au/ausstats/abs@.nsf/Lookup/by%20Subject/4338.0~2011-13~Main%20Features~Daily%20intake%20of%20fruit%20and%20vegetables~10009
Cordain, L., Eaton, S.B, Sebastian, A, Mann, N, Lindeberg, S, Watkins, B.A, Brand-Miller, J. (2005). 
Origins and evolution of the western diet: Health implications for the 21st century. American Journal 
of Clinical Nutrition. 81(2), 341-354.
Gdrc.org. Water footprints and virtual water. N.p., 2015. 
International Food Policy Research Institute. (2015). Global Nutrition Report 2015: Actions and 
Accountability to Advance Nutrition and Sustainable Development, Washington, DC.
National Health and Medical Research Council. (2013). Australian dietary guidelines. Canberra: 
National Health and Medical Research Council. 135
Ginger and Turmeric
Aggarwal, B.B, Gupta, S.C, and Sung, B. (2013). Curcumin: an orally bioavailable blocker of TNF and 
other pro-inflammatory biomarkers. British Journal of Pharmacology, 169(8), 1672–1692. http://doi.org/10.1111/bph.12131 
Chainani-Wu, N. (2003). Safety and anti-inflammatory activity of curcumin: A component of tumeric 
(Curcuma Longa). The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 9.1: 161-168
Ho, S, Chang, K, and Lin, C. (2013). Anti-neuroinflammatory capacity of fresh ginger is attributed mainly 
to 10-gingerol. Food Chemistry. 141.3 3183-3191. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.foodchem.2013.06.010
Madhu, K, Chanda, K, and Saji. M.J. (2012). Safety and efficacy of curcuma longa extract 
in the treatment of painful knee osteoarthritis: A randomised placebo-controlled trial. Inflammopharmacology. 21.2: 129-136. 
Ramadan, Gamal, and El-Menshawy. (2013). Protective effects of ginger-turmeric rhizomes mixture 
on joint inflammation, atherogenesis, kidney dysfunction and other complications in a rat model of human rheumatoid arthritis. International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases. 16.2 (2013): 219-229
Gluten 
Bhatia, B.K. et al. (2014). Diet and psoriasis, part II: Coeliac disease and role of a gluten-free diet. Journal of the American Academy of Dermatology. 71.2: 350-358
Biesiekierski, J.R, and Iven,J. (2015). Non-coeliac gluten sensitivity: Piecing the puzzle together. 
United European Gastroenterology Journal 3.2: 160-165
Golley, S. et al. (2014). Motivations for avoiding wheat consumption in Australia: Results from a 
population survey. Public Health Nutr. 18.03 (2014): 490-499
Lis, D. et al. (2015). No effects of a short-term gluten-free diet on performance in Non-coeliac athletes. 
Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 47.12: 2563-2570
Grains and Legumes
Bouchenak, M, and Lamri-Senhadji, M. (2013) Nutritional quality of legumes and their role in cardiometabolic risk prevention: A review. Journal of Medicinal Food. 16 (3) 2013, 185–198, doi: 10.1089/jmf.2011.0238 
Filiberto, A.C, et.al. (2013). Habitual dietary isoflavone intake is associated with decreased C-reactive 
protein concentrations among healthy premenopausal women. The Journal of Nutrition. 143(6), 900-
906. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.3945/jn.112.173187
Hermsdorff, H.H.M, Zulet, M.Á, Abete, I, and Martínez, J.A. (2011). A legume-based hypocaloric diet 
reduces pro-inflammatory status and improves metabolic features in overweight/obese subjects. 
European Journal of Nutrition. 50(1), 61-69. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s00394-010-0115-x
Setchell, K, Radd, S. (2003). Eat to live: A phytoestrogen protection plan for life. Newleaf. Ireland 
Tosh, S.M. (2013). Review Of Human Studies Investigating The Post-Prandial Blood-Glucose Lowering 
Ability Of Oat And Barley Food Products. European Journal of Clinical Nutrition 67.4: 310-317
Zhang, X. et al. (2013). Chemical composition and antioxidative and anti-inflammatory properties of 
ten commercial mung bean samples. LWT - Food Science and Technology. 54.1 (2013): 171-178anti-inflammatory Eating136
Gut Health
Alipour, B. et al. (2014). Effects of lactobacillus casei supplementation on disease activity and 
inflammatory cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis patients: A randomised double-blind clinical trial. International Journal of Rheumatic Diseases 
Babickova, J. (2015). Pathological and therapeutic interactions between bacteriophages, microbes 
and the host in inflammatory bowel disease. World Journal of Gastroenterology 21.40: 11321
Clemente, J.C. et al. (2012). The impact of the gut microbiota on human health: An integrative view. 
Cell 148.6: 1258-1270
Guarner and Malagelada. (2003). Gut flora in health and disease. The Lancet 361.9356: 512-519
Pagnini, C. et al. (2009). Probiotics promote gut health through stimulation of epithelial innate 
immunity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107.1: 454-459
Pandey, K.R, Naik, S.R, Vakil, B.V. (2015). Probiotics, prebiotics and synbiotics- A review. J Food Sci 
Technol 52.12: 7577-7587
Power, S.E. et al. (2013). Intestinal microbiota, diet and health. British Journal of Nutrition. 111.03: 
387-402
Sears, C.L. (2015). A dynamic partnership: Celebrating our gut flora. Anaerobe 11.5: 247-251Vaghef-Mehrabany, E. et al. (2014). Probiotic supplementation improves inflammatory status in 
patients with rheumatoid arthritis. Nutrition 30.4: 430-435
Mediterranean Diet
Bedard, Lamarche, Corneau, Dodin, Leieux. (2015). Sex differences in the impact of the Mediterranean diet on systemic inflammation. Nutrition Journal. May 12;14:46. doi: 10.1186/s12937-015-0035-y
Davis, C, Bryan, J, Hodgson, J, Murphy, K. (2015). Definition of the Mediterranean diet; A literature 
review. Nutrients. 7, 9139-9153
Knight, A. et al. (2015). A randomised controlled intervention trial evaluating the efficacy of a 
Mediterranean dietary pattern on cognitive function and psychological wellbeing in healthy older adults: The Medley study. BMC Geriatrics. 15.1, doi:10.1186/s12877-015-0054-8
Itsiopoulos, C. et al. (2011). Can the Mediterranean diet lower Hba1c in Type 2 Diabetes? Results from 
a randomised cross-over study. Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular Diseases. 21.9: 740-747. doi: dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.numecd.2010.03.005
Kafatos, A, et.al. (1997). Heart disease risk factor status and dietary changes in the Cretan population 
over the past 30 years: The seven countries study, American Journal Clinical Nutrition. 65:1882-6
Kromhout, D, Keys A, Aravanis, C, Buzina, R, Fidanza, F, Giampaoli, S, Jansen, A, Menotti, A, Nedeljkovic, 
S, Pekkarinen, M, et al. (1989). Food consumption patterns in the 1960s in seven countries. Am J Clin Nutr. May;49(5):889-9
Merle, B.M.J, Silver, R.E, Rosner, B, Seddon, J.M (2015). Adherence to a Mediterranean diet, genetic 
susceptibility, and progression to advanced macular degeneration: a prospective cohort study. Am J Clin Nutr, 102: 5 1196-1206; First published online October 21, 2015. doi:10.3945/ajcn.115.111047137
Sales, C, Oliviero, F, Spinella, P. (2009). The Mediterranean diet model in inflammatory rheumatic 
diseases. Reumatismo 61.1, 10-14 
Willett, W.C, Sacks, F, Trichopoulou, A. et.al.  (1995). Mediterranean diet pyramid: a cultural model 
for healthy eating. American Journal of Clinical Nutrition. Volume: 61, Issue: 6, Supplement: S, 1402S-1406S   
Mushrooms
Chandra, L.C, Smith, B.J, Clarke, S.L, Marlow, D, D’Offay, J.M, Kuvibidila, S.R. (2011). Differential effects of shiitake- and white button mushroom-supplemented diets on hepatic steatosis in C57BL/6 mice: Original Research Article. Food and Chemical Toxicology. Volume 49, Issue 12, Pages 3074-3080
Ito, T, et al. (2011). Ergothioneine as an anti-oxidative/anti-inflammatory component in several edible 
mushrooms. Food Science and Technology Research. 17.2:103-110
Lin, S, et.al. (2013). Auraptene suppresses inflammatory responses in activated RAW264 macrophages 
by inhibiting p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation. Mol. Nutr. Food Res., 57: 1135–1144. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200611
Oh, Y, Hwang, J, Lim, S. (2012). Physiological activity of tofu fermented with mushroom mycelia. Food 
Chemistry, 133.3: 728-734
Nishitani, Y, et al. (2013). Intestinal anti-inflammatory activity of lentinan: Influence on IL-8 and TNFR1 
expression in intestinal epithelial cells. PLoS ONE, 8(4): e62441. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0062441 
Nosalova, V, Bobek, P et.al. (2001). Effects of pleuran (ß-Glucan isolated from pleurotus ostreatus on 
experimental colitis in rats. Physiol. Res. 50: 575-581, 2001 
Vegetarian and Vegan Diets
Barnard, N.D. et al. (2015). A systematic review and meta-analysis of changes in body weight in clinical trials of vegetarian diets. Journal of the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics. Volume 115, Issue 6, 954 – 969
Clarys, P, et.al. (2014). Comparison of nutritional quality of the vegan, vegetarian, semi-vegetarian, 
pesco-vegetarian and omnivorous diet. Nutrients. 6(3), 1318–1332. http://doi.org/10.3390/nu6031318
Clinton, C.M, O’Brien, S, Law, J, Renier, C.M, & Wendt, M.R. (2015). Whole foods, plant-based diet 
alleviates the symptoms of osteoarthritis. Arthritis. doi: http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2015/708152
Glick-Bauer, M., & Yeh, M.C., 2014, ‘The Health Advantage of a Vegan Diet: Exploring the Gut Microbiota 
Connection’, Nutrients, 6(11), 4822–4838. doi: http://doi.org/10.3390/nu6114822
Le, L.T, and Sabaté, J. (2014). Beyond meatless, the health effects of vegan diets: Findings from the 
Adventist cohorts. Nutrients. 6(6), 2131–2147. doi: http://doi.org/10.3390/nu6062131
McDougall, J., et al. (2002). Effects of a very low-fat, vegan diet in subjects with rheumatoid arthritis. 
The Journal of Alternative and Complementary Medicine. 8.1: 71-75
Orlich, M.J., et.al (2013). Vegetarian dietary patterns and mortality in Adventist health study 2. JAMA 
Internal Medicine. 173(13), 1230–1238. doi http://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.6473anti-inflammatory Eating138
Orlich, M. J., et.al. (2015) Vegetarian dietary patterns and the risk of colorectal cancers. JAMA Internal 
Medicine. 175(5), 767–776. http://doi.org/10.1001/jamainternmed.2015.59
Spencer, E.A, Appleby, P.N, Davey, G.K, Key, T.J. (2003). Diet and body mass index in 38,000 EPIC-
Oxford meat-eaters, fish-eaters, vegetarians, and vegans. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 27(6):728-734
Tonstad, S, et.al. (2013). Vegetarian diets and incidence of diabetes in the Adventist Health Study-2. 
Nutrition, Metabolism, and Cardiovascular Diseases. NMCD, 23(4), 292–299. doi http://doi.org/10.1016/j.
numecd.2011.07.004
Yokoyama Y, Nishimura K, Barnard ND, et al. (2014). Vegetarian diets and blood pressure: A meta-
analysis. JAMA Intern Med. 174(4):577-587. doi:10.1001/jamainternmed.2013.14547
Yokoyama, Y., Barnard, N. D., Levin, S. M., and Watanabe, M. (2014). Vegetarian diets and glycemic 
control in diabetes: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Cardiovascular Diagnosis and Therapy. 4(5), 373–382. http://doi.org/10.3978/j.issn.2223-3652.2014.10.04
Vitamin D
Alibhai, S.M.H. et al. (2013). Changes in bone mineral density in men starting androgen deprivation therapy and the protective role of vitamin D. Osteoporosis International. 24.10: 2571-2579
Braun-Moscovici, Y,  Toledano, K, Markovits, D, Rozin, A, Nahir, A.M Balbir-Gurman, A. (2011). Vitamin 
D level: is it related to disease activity in inflammatory joint disease?. Rheumatol Int . 31:493–499 DOI 
10.1007/s00296-009-1251-6 
Kriegel, M.A. et al. (2011). Does Vitamin D affect risk of developing autoimmune disease?: A systematic 
review. Seminars in Arthritis and Rheumatism. Volume 40, Issue 6, 512 - 531.e8
Zinc
Bonaventura, P. et al. (2015). Zinc and its role in immunity and inflammation. Autoimmunity Reviews. 14.4: 277-285